Left ventricular disease occurs frequentlyin dialysis patients. It may be manifest as concentricLV hypertrophy, LV dilatation with or without LVhypertrophy, or systolic dysfunction. Little is knownconcerning the clinical outcome and risk factors forthese disorders. A cohort of 432 end-stage renal diseasepatients who survived at least 6 months had an echo-cardiogram on initiation of dialysis therapy. Clinical,laboratory and echocardiographic data was obtainedannually during follow-up. On initiation of ESRD therapy 16% ofpatients had systolic dysfunction, 41% concentric LVhypertrophy, 28% LV dilatation, and only 16% hadnormal echocardiograms. Median time to developmentof heart failure was 19 months in patients with systolicdysfunction, 38 months in concentric LV hypertrophyand 38 months in LV dilatation. The relative risks ofheart failure in the three groups were significantlyworse than in the normal group, after adjusting forage, diabetes and ischaemic heart disease. Mediansurvival was 38 months in systolic dysfunction, 48months in concentric hypertrophy, 56 months in LVdilatation, and >66 months in the normal group.Two hundred and seventy-five patients had a follow-up echocardiogram 17 months after starting dialysistherapy together with serial measurement of potentialrisk factors prior to the echocardiogram. On follow-up echocardiogram the degree of concentric LV hyper-trophy was independently related to hypertension whileon dialysis, older age, and anaemia while on dialysis;the degree of LV dilatation was related to ischaemicheart disease, anaemia, hypertension and hypoalbumi-nemia while on dialysis; the degree of systolic dysfunc-tion was associated with ischaemic heart disease andanaemia during follow-up. Manifestations of left ventricular diseaseare frequent and persistent in chronic uraemia, and are associated with high risks of heart failure anddeath. Potentially reversible risk factors include anae-mia, hypertension, hypoalbuminaemia and ischaemicheart disease.Key words: left ventricular disease; chronic uraemia;heart failure; anaemia; hypertension; hypoalbuminae-mia; ischaemic heart disease. Introduction: Cardiac disease is the major cause of mortality indialysis patients, accounting for about 40% of deathsin most large registries . The prevalence of congest-ive heart failure, myocardial infarction, and angina ishigh on initiation of ESRD therapy , as is theirincidence during dialysis therapy . Morbidity andmortality from cardiac disease in chronic uraemiausually result from cardiomyopathy and/or ischaemicheart disease . Cardiomyopathy may be manifest as(a) concentric left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy whichresults from LV pressure overload, (b) LV dilatationwhich results from LV volume overload, or (c) systolicdysfunction, a reflection of diminished myocardialcontractility. On echocardiogram concentric LV hyper-trophy is diagnosed by the presence of high LV massindex with normal LV volume and normal LV contract-ility, LV dilatation by high LV volume with normalcontractility, and systolic dysfunction by low fractionalshortening of the left ventricle. All these disorders arefrequently observed in dialysis patients  and togetherwith indices of LV geometry, are independent adversepredictors of mortality. The echocardiographicand clinical outcome of left ventricular disease inchronic uraemia have received little attention. Previousstudies have been affected by small sample size andweak study design .In chronic uraemia there are multiple predisposingfactors to left ventricular disease. High blood pressurepredisposes to LV hypertrophy . Anaemia, blood volume overload, and arteriovenous fistulae are associated with LV dilatation . In addition, diabetesmellitus, ischaemic heart disease, malnutrition andhyperparathyroidism also predispose to cardiomyopa-thy in non-renal patients  and occur frequentlyin chronic uraemia. The uraemic environment itself isprobably pathogenic . The relative contribution ofthese potential adverse cardiac risk factors to thevarious left ventricular disorders in chronic uraemia isunclear, particularly as no prospective studies, withserial measurement of risk factors, have beenundertaken.From the initiation of end-stage renal disease therapywe have prospectively followed a cohort of 432 end-stage renal disease patients who survived at least 6months and had an echocardiogram in the first yearof therapy . Serial echocardiograms were per-formed at annual intervals, together with clinicalassessment and collection of laboratory data. In thispaper we report on the echocardiographic and clinicaloutcome of dialysis patients with (a) concentric LVH,(b) LV dilatation, and (c) systolic dysfunction, togetherwith multivariate analyses of the relationships betweenthese conditions and the following risk factors: age,gender, diabetes mellitus, high blood pressure, anaemia, hypoalbuminaemia, weight gains between haemo-dialysis sessions, and ischaemic heart disease. As thecohort started in 1982, data on adequacy of dialysis,fistula flow rates, and degree of blood volume expansion are not available.Subjects and methods.Data collection: At baseline, and at yearly intervals thereafter, a clinical assessment was undertaken to detect the presence of cardiovascular disease. At monthly intervals the data collected included blood pressure, haemoglobin, serum creatinine, albumin, and calcium levels, and interdialytic weight gains. Blood pressure and blood tests were carried out immediately prior to dialysis in haemodialysis patients. Blood pressure was measured in the contralateral am-1 in patients with patent arteriovenous fistulae or grafts. For each subject, clinical and laboratory values were recorded as baseline values, and the mean of the monthly values while on dialysis, up to the time of the second echocardiogram or the relevant clinical outcome. Baseline and annual echocardiography were performed using M-mode and 2-dimensional ultrasonography. Baseline echocardiography was performed 3.3 i 3.9 (SD) months from the time of starting dialysis, and the second echocardiogram was performed 17.61 10.2 months from the time of starting dialysis. Two hundred and ninety-eight patients continued on dialysis after 1 year, the remainder of the cohort having died or received renal transplantation; 275 patients had a second echocardiogram while on dialysis therapy. Complete data from both echocardiograms were available in 245 patients, from which LV mass index, LV volume, and fractional shortening could be calculated. Figure] shows the source of patients at various phases of the study. The subset of patients who had at least two serial echocardiograms was very similar to the study population; mean age 51 versus 54 years; proportion males, 63 versus 64%; proportion with diabetes mellitus 27 versus 26%; proportion who had myocardial infarction before starting ESRD therapy, 12 versus 14%; proportion with angina pectoria on starting ESRD therapy, 19 versus 21%; and proportion with heart failure 31 versus 33%. In 39% of echocardiograms left ventricular mass index was calculated using the regression-corrected American Society of echocardiography cubic formula, and in 61% the formula of Devereux and Reichek, depending on whether the ertdocardium was included in the measurement of ventricular wall thickness. Both methods give very similar results and are closely correlated with true ventricular mass assessed at autopsy . Similarly. left ventricular cavity dimensions estimated by the Penn convention were regression corrected and presented according to the recommendations of the American Society of Echocardiography . Left ventricular volume was calculated. Both left ventricular mass and left ventricular volume were indexed to body surface area, presented in g/mland ml/ml respectively.Definitions The following definitions were used. Coronary artery disease. History of myocardial infarction, coronary artery bypass surgery or percutaneous transluminal angioplasty , Angina pectoris , Precordial ,chest pain, precipitated by exer- tion or stress, relieved by rest or nitrates. Ischaemic heart disease. Coronary artery disease or angina pectoris. Cardiac failure. An episode of dyspnoea plus two of the following signs: raised jugular venous pressure, bibasilar crackles, pulmonary venous hypertension or interstitial oedema on chest X-ray. It is possible that excess salt and water could contribute to cardiac failure. However, it should be remembered that the hydrostatic pressure gradient in the pulmonary capillary bed does not favour efflux of fluid, in comparison to the systemic capillary bed, unless there is preexisting elevation in pulmonary venous pressure. LV hypertrophy ,Lefr ventricular dilatation ,Concentric LV hypertrophy. LV hypertrophy with normal LV volume and fractional shortening. Systolic dysfunction.
Cardiovascular diseases (CVD) are the leading causes of death
in end-stage renal disease (ESRD) populations. In an era when
CVD mortality in the United States has been declining in the
general population, no such reduction in mortality has been
noted for ESRD patients in whom mortality from heart disease
of all causes has progressively increased and now represents
approximately 50% of all deaths. Moreover, in ESRD populations, death rates from myocardial infarction and from all other
cardiac causes, irrespective of age, exceed those for the population at large (1). In fact, rates of new myocardial infarction
in patients with renal insufficiency but not yet at end stage are
triple those of the general population (2). This has raised
questions about whether patients with chronic renal failure
have a unique susceptibility to CVD, whether rates of atherosclerosis are accelerated in renal failure, and whether ESRD is
a vasculotoxic condition.
A partial explanation for these observations may come from
the demographic characteristics of ESRD populations. Increased age is an important unmodifiable demographic factor
associated with cardiovascular risk. During the past 15 yr, the
median incident age of patients with ESRD in the United States
has increased by more than a decade, from 53 yr in 1980 to 64
yr in 1995. Patients older than age 65 now represent nearly
68% of all new dialysis patients. Moreover, during the same
time period, the greatest percentage increase in incidence of
ESRD (nearly sevenfold) was seen in the those age 75 and
older. As a result, there are nearly triple the number of those
age 65 and older in dialysis populations than are in the general
U.S. population (3). Because CVD is seen more commonly in
older populations, it is not surprising that there is a high
prevalence of preexisting comorbid cardiovascular conditions
in new ESRD patients. Thus, for example, in 1997, 34.7% had
a history of congestive heart failure, 25.1% had a history of
coronary artery disease (CAD), 9.4% had a history of coronary
myocardial infarction, and 15.6% had a history of coronary


peripheral vascular disease, a surrogate marker for CAD (4).
Such preexisting cardiovascular conditions have long been
known to adversely affect ESRD survival.
Other important risks for fatal and nonfatal cardiovascular
events are the diseases that cause ESRD. Of these, hypertension and diabetes mellitus, which cause 70% of all ESRD in the
United States, are strongly associated with the development of
CVD, particularly CAD, whose attendant ischemia not only
can produce acute coronary syndromes but also can contribute
significantly to other cardiac disorders. For example, it is know
to be the underlying basis for 70% of congestive heart failure
(5). Though seen less often as causes of renal failure, systemic
lupus erythematosus, vasculitides, and atherosclerotic renal
disease, resulting either from direct effects on the vasculature
or from the effects of steroid therapy, are strongly associated
with the presence of CAD as is the nephrotic syndrome.
However, although age, hypertension, and diabetes are important risks for CVD in ESRD populations, present data reveal
that increased rates of cardiovascular mortality are seen across
all age groups (1). When the results of current studies are
compared with ones done in an era when the median age of
ESRD patients was less than 40 yr and when diabetics were
largely excluded from dialysis and transplantation but also
showed high cardiovascular mortality, one must conclude that
demographics alone cannot explain the predilection for CAD
events in ESRD.

CAD Risk Factors in Renal Failure and the
Effects of Their Modification
ESRD is associated with many established and newly recognized risk factors for ischemic heart disease and its consequences (Figure 1). When these aggregated risks are coupled
with the current ESRD demographics, cardiovascular morbidity and mortality are virtually assured. Thus, it seems reasonable that modifying these factors may serve effectively in
primary and secondary prevention or reduction of cardiovascular events.

Dyslipoproteinemia
Lipoprotein abnormalities are the most often discussed established CAD risk factors seen in renal failure. Hypertriglyceridemia is most commonly observed in ESRD but has a
weaker statistical association with CAD than other frequently noted lipoprotein abnormalities (6), such as elevated total
serum cholesterol, VLDL, LDL, IDL, Lp (a), and apolipoprotein CIII and reduced HDL and apolipoproteins AI, AII, and
AIII. The extent of these changes depends on the duration and
severity of renal insufficiency because these abnormalities
become more apparent as renal deterioration advances (7).
Moreover, their pathophysiologic significance may vary with
race and gender (8,9).
Factors that contribute to uremia-associated dyslipoproteinemia include obesity, diabetes mellitus, uremic glucose intolerance, hyperparathyroidism (HPTH), reduced active vitamin D
metabolites, early menopause (in the case of women), and
possibly carnitine deficiency that impairs fatty acid metabolism.
There is consensus that treatment of dyslipidemia in nonESRD populations can lead to stabilization and even regression
of atherosclerotic plaque and to a reduction of fatal and nonfatal myocardial ischemic events over time periods ranging
from 6 mo to 2 yr or more (10,11). Although there is little
question that lipid-lowering agents can favorably modify lipoprotein concentrations in both non-ESRD and ESRD populations, unlike non-ESRD populations, there is no evidence to
show reductions of cardiovascular events in renal failure (12).
Perhaps the inability to see such benefits relates to fact that it
may take as long as 2 to 5 yr to see a decrease in cardiovascular
events, barely enough time to see such improvements in ESRD
patients whose 5-yr survival on dialysis is only 40 to 50% (4).
Nevertheless, because lipoprotein abnormalities are observed
early in the course of progressive renal deterioration, it seems
more likely that intervention at a time well before the patient
approaches ESRD may yield the best results. Fibric acid derivatives, bile sequestrants, omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids, and nicotinic acid have been used to correct dyslipoproteinemia in ESRD, but the best tolerated are the statin drugs.
Studies that tested the effects of L-carnitine supplementation
showed that although blood carnitine levels could be restored,
there were no significant effects on lipid profiles (13).

Hypertension
Hypertension is a well-established risk factor not only for
myocardial ischemia, atherogenesis, and coronary artery calcification but also for the development of left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH). By contributing to LVH, hypertension represents an important risk for sudden cardiac death. Forces on arterial and aortic walls produced by increased BP alter vascular endothelial cell function by inciting arterial oxidative
stress and inflammatory responses. These effects in turn initiate the atherosclerotic process and stimulate various growthpromoting peptides (14). The attendant endothelial dysfunction
can lead to hypertrophy, hyperplasia, lipid incorporation, and
calcification of the vascular smooth muscle and to associated
reductions in vascular compliance and thus to tissue ischemia.
The reduced elasticity of the aorta and peripheral arteries
further contributes to increased cardiac work, LVH, and increased cardiovascular mortality in ESRD patients (15).
Because hypertension is a major hazard for CAD and stroke
and because BP reduction can reduce the risk for myocardial
infarction, it is disheartening that BP is not particularly well
controlled in ESRD patients (16). This may be due to numerous factors, including medication cost, lack of patient compliance and education about their medications, selection of an
inappropriate dry weight, excess interdialytic weight gain, suboptimal therapy, and withholding antihypertensive medications
before dialysis. Whatever the reasons, efforts to improve BP
need to be intensified. In this regard, the use of ambulatory BP
monitoring may be of great use because it allows a more
comprehensive assessment of daily variations of BP than single
measurements and therefore may be better in helping to determine the best antihypertensive strategies.
Many drugs are available for the task. Recently published
data from the Heart Outcomes and Prevention Evaluation study
(17) suggest that in high-risk patients, the use of an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACEI) significantly reduces
death rates for stroke, myocardial infarction, and all cardiovascular causes, effects that could not be attributed simply to BP
lowering. Thus, drugs of this class may be beneficial in ESRD
patients, especially if hyperkalemia does not become a problem. The use of ␤-blockers may also have a beneficial effect in
this group who either have or are at high risk for developing
cardiovascular complications. In addition, there may be a theoretical benefit from using calcium channel blockers because
they have been shown in animal studies to decrease intravascular and myocardial calcium content (18).

Left Ventricular Hypertrophy
LVH is an important risk factor for death after myocardial
infarction; LVH and increased left ventricular mass index are
the most common structural abnormalities of the heart seen in
renal failure. LVH can be attributed in large part but not
exclusively to the effects of hypertension. The high prevalence
of LVH in ESRD populations may well account for their
observed excess fatal coronary heart disease events, for in
addition to increased coronary mass there is a reduced density
of capillaries with respect to cardiomyocytes as well as an
increase of the wall to lumen ratios of intramyocardial arterioles (19,20). Such changes can decrease myocardial tolerance
to ischemia by creating an imbalance between oxygen supply
and demand. This may contribute to the decreased coronary
vasodilator reserve noted with LVH and may also explain the
25 to 30% prevalence of myocardial ischemia seen in ESRD
patients who have no anatomically significant coronary event
documented by angiography (9).
Secondary HPTH, elevated levels of endothelin, and other
inhibitors of nitric oxide synthesis may also contribute to
altered endothelial and cardiomyocyte growth and function. It
seems reasonable that coronary vasodilators, e.g., nitrates, calcium channel blockers, and estrogens, or drugs that improve
endothelial function such as lipid lowering agents and ACEI
may be beneficial. ACEI may also produce regression of LVH.
Although regression of LVH may be associated with lower
cardiac mortality, such regression is infrequently seen in
ESRD. If such a benefit is to be derived, as with therapy for
dyslipoproteinemia, early intervention with antihypertensive
agents may ultimately be most effective. At present, however,
there is no evidence for such benefits in the ESRD population.

Anemia
Anemia contributes to myocardial ischemia by producing
high cardiac output and increased cardiac work, reduced coronary artery filling times, reduced myocardial oxygen delivery,
and reduced coronary artery dilator reserve. These effects are
additive to those of LVH. It now is well established that
treatment of uremic anemia with erythropoietin can improve
cardiac performance (21). Although correction of hematocrit to
concentrations above 30% has improved the well-being of
most patients undergoing renal replacement therapy and may
have decreased the number of anginal episodes, there are no
studies to show that the number of other fatal and nonfatal
cardiac events has been reduced.

Diabetes Mellitus and Carbohydrate Intolerance
Diabetes mellitus is the most common cause of renal failure
in the United States and is associated not only with hypertension but also with hypertriglyceridemia and hypercholesterolemia— elevated LDL and depressed HDL cholesterol concentrations—with LVH and with hyperfibrinogenemia. Moreover, chronic renal failure, independent of diabetes mellitus, is also
associated with insulin resistance and glucose intolerance.
Both are associated with the accumulation of advanced glycation end products that may induce cellular activation and
endothelial damage, ultimately contributing to or even accelerating atherogenesis (22).
There is considerable evidence that aggressive glucose control can significantly reduce microvascular and macrovascular
complications of diabetes. Therefore, it is important not only to
manage diabetes aggressively before the onset of renal disease
but also to continue rigorous glycemic control after ESRD has
developed. Because hypoglycemic reactions are more common
in renal failure, there is a tendency for nephrologists and others
who care for diabetics with ESRD to allow blood glucose
concentrations to remain at levels that would be unacceptable
in the absence of renal failure, thus sustaining the risk for
vascular damage and atherogenesis. Sustained rigorous glycemic control before the onset, as well as after the initiation, of
renal replacement therapies may be important in reducing
cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in diabetic patients as
has been shown by Wu et al. (23). However, whether such
benefits would be offset by excessive hypoglycemic complications needs to be investigated further.

Altered Pituitary-Gonadal Axis
It has long been observed that women who develop ESRD
have abnormal menstrual cycles; they either cease menstruating or menstruate infrequently, and they often fail to ovulate.
Thus, women with ESRD seem to have premature menopause
and, as a result, may be at cardiovascular risk earlier than
postmenopausal women in the non-ESRD population. Women
with ESRD have symptoms of ischemic heart disease and
significant anatomic CAD with a greater frequency than
women without ESRD, but still their high rates of CAD and
symptoms of myocardial ischemia are less than those of men
(8). Nevertheless, these findings suggest that women with
ESRD may have accelerated atherosclerosis and may benefit
from estrogen replacement therapy. In this regard, the HERS
Trial described a late benefit of estrogen replacement in postmenopausal women (24). Thus, it may be that estrogen replacement therapy in women with renal failure may reduce coronary
artery risk; however, Stehman-Breen et al. (25) observed that
estrogen replacement therapy is prescribed less frequently in
ESRD than in non-ESRD women. Recent studies have found
that treatment of postmenopausal women with ESRD using
estradiol could increase HDL cholesterol and apolipoprotein
A1 (26,27). Although such improvements may confer protection, once again there are no large-scale studies showing coronary events to be decreased (26). Conjugated estrogen may
also be beneficial because of its effects as a coronary vasodilator, but this effect may be countered by its stimulation of
vascular smooth muscle calcification (28). Perhaps this might
in part contribute to the early increase in cardiovascular events
noted in the HERS study (24). Thus, the impact of estrogen
replacement therapy on preventing cardiovascular events in
ESRD remains to be determined.

Hyperhomocysteinemia
Hyperhomocysteinemia has emerged as an important risk
factor for fatal and nonfatal coronary events (29). In patients
with established CAD, it is also a strong predictor of mortality
(30). Homocysteine has been shown to enhance neutrophilendothelial interactions and impair endothelium-dependent vasodilatation. As in the general population, hyperhomocysteinemia is seen with high prevalence and has been found to be an independent predictor of CVD events in renal failure (31).
Homocysteine metabolism is critically dependent on vitamin
B6, vitamin B12, and folic acid; thus, deficiencies in these
vitamins could limit homocysteine metabolism and produce
hyperhomocysteinemia. In renal failure, poor nutrition coupled
with removal of water-soluble vitamins by dialysis may partially explain a tendency to deficiencies of these vitamins and
the high prevalence of hyperhomocysteinemia. In non-ESRD
populations, treatment with folic acid alone or in combination
with vitamins B12 and B6 has been shown to lower homocysteine levels, but to date no clinical, randomized trials measuring the effects of lowering homocysteine levels on cardiovascular events have reported their results. In renal failure, most
patients are prescribed multivitamins with enough folic acid to
reduce homocysteine, at least in nonuremic subjects. Thus,
current folic acid supplementation regimens may be inadequate
in renal failure because hyperhomocysteinemia and excess
cardiovascular events persist.

Calciotropic Hormone and Calcium/Phosphorus
Dysregulation
HPTH, hypovitaminosis D, and hyperphosphatemia are
nearly universally found in ESRD and develop progressively as
renal function deteriorates. Although these alterations are most
often considered in the context of renal osteodystrophy, there is
a growing body of evidence to support the view that elevated
parathyroid hormone (PTH), reduced production of active vitamin D metabolites, altered tissue responsiveness to these
hormones, sustained hyperphosphatemia, and the aggressive
use of calcium supplements and vitamin D analogs are important in the pathogenesis and maintenance of CVD in chronic
renal failure (32). Both PTH and vitamin D increase the calcium concentration of vascular smooth muscle and cardiac
myocytes, thereby altering myocardial oxidative metabolism
and affecting BP, cardiac contractility, and force generation.
This can cause the heart to be more critically dependent on
oxygen and, thus, more susceptible to ischemia. Vitamin D
depletion can produce vascular smooth muscle cell growth and
proliferation, and hypovitaminosis D is associated with coronary artery calcification, a phenomenon that has recently been
found to be exuberant in human uremic hearts when compared
with nonuremic hearts (33,34). In this regard, in renal failure,
HPTH is associated with reduced luminal diameter of small
intramyocardial arteries. Vitamin D deficiency and HPTH can
produce increased cardiac mass and are associated strongly
with heart valve calcification, and HPTH is associated with
myocardial fibrosis and calcification. In renal failure, HPTH
has been shown to affect adversely lipoprotein metabolism and
to produce insulin resistance and glucose intolerance. A role
for vitamin D is less clear, but 1,25(OH2) D3 has been shown
to correct glucose intolerance, insulin resistance, and hypertriglyceridemia in ESRD patients on dialysis (32).
One of the common consequences of altered calcium and
phosphorus homeostasis resulting from these changes in calciotropic hormones is hyperphosphatemia and an elevated calcium ϫ phosphate products that are often difficult to control
and that are associated with calcification of soft tissues, including the aorta, coronary, and other medium sized arteries. It
is therefore not surprising that one marker of this dysfunctional
calcium/phosphorus regulation, hyperphosphatemia, is associated with a significantly increased risk of mortality in ESRD
(35). Attempts to correct serum PTH concentrations to 100 to
300 pcg/ml, hyperphosphatemia to less than 6.5 mg/dl, and
keeping calcium ϫ phosphate products in the range of 50 to 60
must begin early in the course of renal failure, well before the
need for dialysis. There are numerous calcium supplements
and vitamin D analogs as well as a novel non–aluminumcontaining phosphate binder that are available for use. However, one must be careful not to suppress PTH excessively or
to produce hypercalcemia or hypervitaminosis D for these can
also contribute to metastatic vascular calcification; once established, such calcification is rarely reversed.
Taken together, these changes in PTH and vitamin D status
and calcium/phosphorus control, either through direct or permissive effects on cardiac metabolism, glucose intolerance,
hypertension, dyslipoproteinemia, vascular smooth muscle hypertrophy and arterial calcification, and LVH, contribute significantly to the sustained high rates of morbidity and mortality
from cardiac dysfunction, atherosclerosis, and CVD seen in
uremia. The ubiquity of this metabolic derangement, practically unique to renal failure, may also explain why the benefits
of modifying more traditional risk factors have not been unequivocally seen in ESRD as they have in the non-ESRD
population.

Inflammation
Increasingly, atherosclerosis and acute coronary events are
being viewed more as a consequence of inflammation and less
as simply the result of vascular lipid accumulation. The inflammation is thought to result from processes that induce
vascular endothelial dysfunction, thus leading to the production of vasoactive substances, cytokines, thromboxanes, and
growth factors and to the accumulation of macrophages and T
lymphocytes in atherosclerotic lesions (36). One such marker
of this process is the acute phase reactant C-reactive protein
(CRP). Other inflammatory markers include serum amyloid A,
inerleukin-6, and intercellular adhesion molecule-1. Several
studies have shown a strong association between elevated CRP
concentration and coronary artery risk, particularly in those
with previous myocardial infarction and unstable angina. It is
also a strong predictor of fatal myocardial infarction (37).
CRP has also been observed to be elevated in hemodialysis
patients, in association with an atherogenic lipoprotein profile.
It was also a strong predictor of death from cardiovascular
events (38). Elevated concentrations of numerous cytokines
that mediate inflammatory processes have been observed in
hemodialysis patients. The reasons for this are uncertain but
could relate to biocompatibility of the dialyzer membrane; less
biocompatible, unmodified cellulosic membranes have greater
cytokine-generating potential and have been associated with
greater patient all-cause as well as coronary mortality (39). In
addition, exposure of dialysis patients to numerous bacterial
infections as well as chronic inflammatory reactions from
internal, artificial, or in-dwelling vascular access devices may
contribute. With respect to infection, it is believed that only
chronic infections with herpes simplex virus-1 and Chlamydia
have been associated with increases of coronary heart disease,
at least in non-ESRD populations.
In transplant patients, inflammation produced by chronic
rejection might contribute to CVD events. There is also an
association with frequency of acute rejection episodes (40).
Whether this is related to the high corticosteroid doses used to
suppress rejection is uncertain. However, steroid use is much
reduced since the advent of newer antirejection medications.
These data suggest that in ESRD, chronic inflammation of
diverse causes may contribute to the excess CVD mortality
seen in this group. Although measurements of CRP and other
acute phase reactants may be useful prognostic indicators in
patients with acute coronary syndromes, additional studies will
be needed to determine their value as markers for atherosclerosis risk.

Dialysis as a Risk Factor
Although hemodialysis itself is not widely believed to be a
promoter of atherogenesis, its effects on inflammation might
suggest such a role. However, the hemodynamic effects of
hemodialysis do contribute to myocardial ischemia that often
occurs during a dialysis session. The reasons for this include
increased heart rate and decreased coronary filling time, leading to reduce coronary blood flow and to decreased tissue
oxygen delivery resulting from a pH-mediated enhancement of
oxygen affinity for hemoglobin (Bohr effect). When coupled
with the high prevalence of LVH, anemia, reduced coronary
vasodilator reserve, and underlying CAD, hemodialysis can
simultaneously reduce myocardial oxygen delivery at a time
when the increased heart rate is producing a greater myocardial oxygen requirement. This mismatch between oxygen supply
and demand may account not only for the many clinically
apparent cardiac events occurring during dialysis but also for
episodes of silent ischemia that have been recorded during
hemodialysis using ambulatory ECG monitoring (41,42).
There are other important factors that may also contribute to
myocardial ischemia. For example, as noted above, the nature
of the dialyzer membrane may have a significant impact on
acute coronary events and their outcome. The use of low
concentrations of dialysate calcium decreases cardiac contractility and may predispose patients to lower BP and to hypotensive episodes with attendant risks for ischemia and arrhythmia (43). The intermittent nature of hemodialysis has been associated with increased rates of sudden and cardiac deaths
perhaps partly as a consequence of volume overload that produces increased myocardial wall stress, especially when coupled with the previously mentioned hemodynamic effects of
dialysis. Moreover, inadequate dialysis is associated with
higher mortality. As a result of the foregoing, there is increasing interest in dialysis sessions of longer duration and with
shorter interdialytic intervals, and many centers are studying
the benefits of nightly hemodialysis. However, currently there
is no broad body of evidence to show that such changes in the
hemodialysis prescription will reduce cardiovascular morbidity
and mortality. It also remains to be seen whether avoidance of
low dialysate calcium can also reduce cardiovascular events.
However, unless hypercalcemia is a problem, there is no justification for the use of low-calcium dialysate.
Peritoneal dialysis is also associated with a high risk for
cardiovascular mortality. The reasons for this are complex. In
the past, diabetics and patients with severe CVD were more
often referred for this modality, but that is not the case now.
The use of acetate in the dialysate may affect lipoprotein
profiles and thus be atherogenic. Similarly, the high prevalence
of adynamic bone disease in this group could predispose them
to a greater risk for vascular calcification with attendant cardiovascular complications.
In summary, identification and management of risk factors
for CAD early in the course of renal insufficiency and early
detection of the presence of CAD itself have the potential to
reduce fatal and nonfatal cardiovascular events in ESRD patients. In an era when late referral for nephrologic care is
common, thus, in part, contributing to the high rate of cardiovascular complication seen in ESRD, achieving a goal of early
referral will be difficult and will require nephrologists to work
with non-nephrologists to manage pre-ESRD patients and to
educate them about the importance of early intervention and
referral.

Silent Ischemia, Occult CAD, and
Nonatherosclerotic Coronary Disease: Risks for
Cardiovascular Events in ESRD
Although modification of the previously discussed risk factors may variably reduce cardiovascular events, these risk
factors alone have not proved to be good predictors of future
cardiovascular events. Therefore, because the presence of CAD is a predictor of future cardiovascular events, it is also important to identify patients with underlying CAD to manage their
renal failure and comorbid conditions effectively with the least
risk for cardiovascular compromise. A review of the medical
records of dialysis patients has been shown to be the best
source of data for estimating the risk of future fatal and
nonfatal cardiovascular events. Such reviews reveal that older,
white men; diabetics; those with confirmed histories of angina,
myocardial infarction, or peripheral vascular disease; and those
with low predialysis systolic BP are at particularly high risk.
However, although the majority of patients who enter ESRD
programs do not have a history of CVD, angina, or peripheral
vascular disease, a significant number have silent myocardial
ischemia, with or without obvious CAD involving a major
vessel, or have occult CAD. These patients may also be at
increased risk for future cardiovascular events.
The significance of silent myocardial ischemia is difficult to
assess, particularly in a patient who is younger than 50 yr and
does not have a history of ischemic heart disease. In such
patients, the presence of a positive myocardial perfusion scan
may require confirmation by coronary arteriography. Positive
stress-perfusion scans or ischemic ECG findings on ambulatory monitoring have been noted in approximately 2 to 3% of
the non-ESRD population (44). However, silent ischemia is
detected more often in those with histories of myocardial
infarction or chronic stable angina and in those high-risk patients, described in the preceding paragraph, and carries a more
ominous prognosis than in those with apparent low risk. In
these patients, data suggest that future cardiovascular events
depend more on severity and number of coronary vessels
involved than on the presence of symptoms.
The prevalence of silent myocardial ischemia in ESRD
patients is uncertain, but given the demographics and the
clustering of risk factors in ESRD, one must suppose that it is
more prevalent than in the non-ESRD population. Several
small studies using ambulatory ECG monitoring during hemodialysis showed a prevalence of silent ischemia and occult
CAD of approximately 33% (range, 15 to 100%) (45). Some
data suggest that its occurrence may be associated with an
increase in cardiovascular events, but the numbers of patients
studied have been too small to draw a definitive conclusion.
Occult CAD is usually found when coronary artery calcification is seen or suspected by chest x-ray, ECG, echocardiogram, or computed tomography scan of the chest or when
coronary angiography is done for evaluation for other cardiac
disorders or for preoperative evaluation. In ESRD, this is seen
most often in patients with peripheral vascular disease and in
diabetics, in whom its presence is a major determinant of
survival. In ESRD, it has been found in approximately one
third of patients. Occult coronary disease can be discovered
without resorting to coronary angiography. The use of noninvasive techniques such as electron beam computed tomography
(EBCT) detects the presence of coronary artery calcification
and thereby the presence of coronary atherosclerosis. Although
it cannot determine the degree of coronary artery occlusion, the
severity of calcification determined by EBCT does predict a
population at high risk for silent myocardial ischemia (46).


However, EBCT has not been found to be an accurate predictor
of cardiovascular events in high-risk asymptomatic adults (47).
Thus, when appropriate, the use of ECG stress testing using
dipyridamole or adenosine coupled with myocardial perfusion
scanning with thallium or sestamibi and possibly echocardiography will be the most specific and sensitive methods of
determining the presence of silent myocardial ischemia and the
further need for coronary angiography. The use of ambulatory
ECG may be useful, but the high prevalence of LVH makes
interpretation of the ECG alone difficult even if it is performed
during the stress of hemodialysis.
There is also a subgroup of patients who may or may not
have symptoms of myocardial ischemia associated with positive ECG or perfusion scans in the absence of significant
narrowing of a major coronary artery. This has been noted in
approximately 25 to 30% of patients (9). This circumstance is
often triggered by hypertensive crises or by profound hypotension and tachycardia often occurring during dialysis. These
patients are usually younger, more often African American,
with histories of hypertension, and a high prevalence of LVH
and more severe anemia. As noted previously, this is probably
related to the loss of coronary vasodilator reserve, possibly
related to alterations in the structure, function, and number of
myocardial arterioles producing a greater susceptibility to
myocardial ischemia and to cardiovascular mortality.
The foregoing raises questions about how extensively to
evaluate the heart in ESRD patients given their propensity for
cardiovascular events. This will depend on a careful assessment of potential risk. Certainly not every patient needs ECG
stress testing, ambulatory ECG monitoring, or coronary angiography, including patients in whom occult CAD or silent
ischemia has been revealed. In fact, coronary angiography,
because of its own inherent risks, should be reserved for
clinical situations in which an intervention such as coronary
bypass grafting (CABG) or percutaneous coronary angioplasty
(PTCA) is contemplated. Figure 2 presents an approach to
evaluating asymptomatic CAD in renal failure.
One reason to identify dialysis patients who are likely to
suffer cardiovascular events is to reduce their occurrence when
patients are placed in high-risk situations. One important circumstance is surgery, to which ESRD patients are exposed
often. It is widely known that patients with CAD have a high
risk for intra- and perioperative cardiac events and death. Such
patients are older and have signs of congestive heart failure and
CAD. Their incidence of perioperative infarction is approximately 4 to 5% and between 2 and 20% during the 2 yr after
surgery in the general population (48,49). In ESRD, such data
are unavailable, but one might expect that the results would at
best be the same. Thus, in such high-risk patients, further
assessment of myocardial perfusion and delineation of coronary anatomy may be helpful in deciding a medical management plan for the pre- and postsurgical period. Although the
use of long-acting nitrates can decrease myocardial ischemic
episodes, one might choose in addition to use ␤-blockers
before and immediately after surgery, a strategy that has been
shown to reduce immediate and long-term postoperative cardiovascular events (49). One might also consider, as prophylaxis, CABG or coronary angioplasty with stent placement
before undertaking the needed surgery such as is often done in
diabetics before renal transplantation. However, there have
been no prospective, randomized studies in this setting to
evaluate whether these invasive prophylactic measures, which
have their own morbidity and mortality, actually reduce fatal
and nonfatal cardiovascular events.

Symptomatic CAD
In ESRD patients, the management of stable and unstable
angina is approximately the same as in the non-ESRD population (Figure 3) and consists of nitrates to improve coronary
flow, ␤-blockers to decrease heart work and oxygen demand,
and, if indicated, calcium-channel blockers to vasodilate coronary arteries and to reduce BP. Platelet inhibition with aspirin,
ticlopidine, or glycoprotein IIa/IIIb antagonists is effective,
with the last more likely to be used with unstable angina and as
an adjunct to angioplasty with or without stent placement. The
use of these antiplatelet drugs alone or together with unfractionated heparin can significantly reduce the number of myocardial infarctions or deaths (50). The use of unfractionated
heparin and aspirin as antithrombin therapy is a standard practice. Low-molecular-weight heparins have also been variably
effective in unstable angina. Thrombolytic therapy should be
reserved for patients with acute myocardial infarction. Warfarin has been shown to be at least as effective as aspirin in
preventing recurrence or death after an initial myocardial infarction. Antithrombin therapy, especially with warfarin, presents added risks for bleeding complications in hemodialysis
patients, who often receive heparin during their dialysis session. In these patients, close attention to prothrombin time is  essential; it may also be necessary to avoid or minimize the use
of heparin during dialysis.
Failure of medical management may ultimately necessitate
CABG or angioplasty to prevent a first myocardial infarction
or a recurrence. CABG is frequently performed in ESRD
patients with a reportedly “acceptable” perioperative mortality.
However, a review of numerous small series reveal that the
perioperative death risk varies between 1 and 25% (51). A
recent large study in ESRD patients showed a perioperative
mortality of approximately 12.5% or approximately threefold
greater than in non-ESRD patients (51). Percutaneous coronary
angioplasty is a less invasive alternative that has approximately
half the periprocedure mortality as CABG but that is associated
with higher recurrence of cardiovascular events and a greater
need for repeat procedures because of restenosis. Despite a
higher initial mortality rate, patients undergoing CABG have a
longer overall survival than those with PTCA (51–53). However, it is uncertain what fraction of those who have PTCA had
concomitant stent placement, because PTCA ϩ stent is associated with a lower incidence of restenosis, less need for
revascularization, and fewer episodes of angina (54).

Conclusion
As outlined in the limited space above, the increased cardiovascular morbidity and mortality seen in renal failure are
the result of complex interactions among a myriad of demographic, disease-related, and treatment-related factors. Because
this increased cardiovascular risk occurs well before the onset
of ESRD, the present trend of late nephrologic referral and the
failure to recognize these risks and to intervene early may
contribute to the excess fatal and nonfatal cardiovascular events in ESRD. On the basis of currently available data, it
seems reasonable to conclude that if these events are to be
prevented or reduced in the ESRD population, then early
detection and management of cardiovascular risk and disease
and early referral for specialty care, even before there is
significant decline in renal function, may be necessary. Such
interventions may limit the need for coronary angioplasty,
which has a high failure rate, and CABG with its attendant high
perioperative mortality rate when performed in ESRD patients.
Growing evidence has been gathered over the last 15 years regarding the role of nontraditional or uremia related risk factors in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis in subjects with renal failure. Among those factors, dyslipidemia, inflammation, hyperhomocysteinemia, and oxidant stress have been extensively studied. However, the clinical significance of many of these factors remains controversial in light of reported studies.
In this article, the existing evidence regarding the role of uremia related risk factors in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis is reviewed, with special emphasis on prevalence, cardiac risk, and management in patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD). Consensus treatment recommendations are provided for risk factors for which there is evidence to support preventive or therapeutic interventions.

 Patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) have a substantially increased risk of cardiovascular disease (CVD) compared with the general population (1,2). The high prevalence of established traditional risk factors for atherosclerosis (e.g., diabetes, hypertension) in these patients undoubtedly contributes to the accelerated rate of CVD. In addition, several hypotheses have emerged to explain the high prevalence of CVD in patients with CKD. Growing evidence has been gathered over the last 15 years regarding the role of uremia related risk factors such as dyslipidemia, in?ammation, hyperhomocysteinemia, and oxidant stress in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis in subjects with renal failure. This article reviews the potential role of these nontraditional or urerr1ia related risk factors for atherosclerosis with special emphasis on prevalence, cardiac risk, and management in patients with CKD.

Patients with chronic renal failure suffer from a secondary form of complex dyslipidemia consisting of both quantitative and qualitative abnormalities in serum lipoproteins (3). An increasing number of studies suggest that dyslipidemia is an independent risk factor for atherosclerosis in renal failure.Prevalence and Association with Renal Failure.

Dyslipidemia is common in patients with CKD and can be detected as soon as the glomerular ?ltration rate (GF R) falls below 50 ml/min (8). In general, the prevalence of hyperlipidernia appears to increase with worsening of renal function (8). However, the level of renal dysfunction at which elevated lipid levels become more prevalent than in normal individuals is not well de?ned (8). The prevalence of dyslipidemia also varies according to dietary habits and the cause of renal disease (9). For example, diabetes and the nephrotic syndrome exacerbate the lipid abnormalities of renal failure (10). Depending on the methodology and the diagnostic criteria used for the evaluation, lipid abnormalities are present in 70 100% of patients with chronic renal insu?iciency and the nephrotic syndrome and in patients treated by peritoneal dialysis, but are lower in patients undergoing chronic hemodialysis (40 50%).The most important abnormalities of uremic dyslipidemia are 1) elevated levels of triglyceride enrich particles (very low density lipoprotein [VLDL] remnants and interrnediate density lipoprotein [IDL]); 2) low high- density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol; 3) preponderance of small, dense low density lipoprotein (LDL); and 4) increased Lp(a) lipoprotein levels (3,8,12). Characteristically, serum triglyceride levels are elevated and total cholesterol is normal, although they may also be high or low (8). Growing evidence suggests that all of the components of this type of dyslipidemia are independ- ently atherogenic (13 19). In addition to quantitative changes of lipoprotein particles, several compositional and qualitative changes have been demonstrated to occur in renal failure. Oxidation, carbamylation, and modi?cation of apolipoprotein B by advanced glycation end products (AGES), for example, may increase the atherogenicity of lipoproteins.The pathogenesis of lipid abnormalities in uremia remains incompletely understood (3,20). Hypertriglyc eridemia has been explained at least in part by reduced activity of lipoprotein lipase and hepatic triglyceride lipase, which is the major enzyme responsible for the esteri?cation of free cholesterol (3). Insulin resistance may also contribute. Reduced HDL levels may re?ect alterations in cholesteryl ester transfer protein or lecithinzcholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT), which regulates the exchange of triglyceride ester between VLDL and HDL (3,21,22). Triglyceride enriched HDLS are cleared more rapidly from the plasma. There are few studies examining the relationship between lipid abnormalities and CVD in patients with renal disease not on dialysis (7,23). These studies suggest that, in patients with CKD, cardiac disease is more prevalent than expected and that lipid abnormalities are independently associated with cardiovascular events. J ungers et al. (7) prospectively followed 147 patients with a GF R of 25 50 ml/rr1in. Patients who had a myocardial infarction (MI) during follow up (n : 41) had lower HDL cholesterol and higher triglyceride levels than those without MI (n : 147). In a multivariate analysis, low HDL cholesterol was the only lipid abnormality to be independently associated with cardiovascular events.

For end stage renal disease (ESRD) patients on dialysis, there are several observational studies exarr1ining the relationship between dyslipidemia and CVD outcome. In hemodialysis patients, levels of IDL cholesterol have been shown to correlate with aortic atherosclerosis determined by aortic pulse wave velocity (19,28). Plasma levels of Lp(a) lipoprotein have also been reported to be independent predictors of carotid atherosclerosis and coronary artery disease (17,18,25,26). In patients treated by peritoneal dialysis, Webb and Brown (27) found that the severity of coronary artery disease (based on standard clinical ?ndings) correlated with serum levels of total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, and triglycerides.

Atherosclerosis is increasingly recognized as a chronic inflammatory disease of the vessel wall (34). In a variety of experimental and animal models of atherosclerosis, progression ofatherosclerotic plaques has been shown to be associated with secretion of proin?ammatory cytokines and mediators (e.g., adhesion molecules, interleukin [IL] 6, tumor necrosis factor [TNF] oI, and interferon [IFN]~/) and progressive accumulation of in?ammatory cells (T lymphocytes, monocytes) (34). Epidemiologic studies also support the role of inflammation in the pathogenesis of CVD. Several studies have reported that in?ammatory markers are predictive of CVD in humans. For instance, plasma levels of C reactive protein (CRP) and soluble intercellular adhesion molecule (sICAM) 1 have been shown to predict future cardiovascular events in large epidemiologic cohorts of normal individuals.

Elevated levels of inflammatory markers have been reported in patients with chronic renal disease. Several in?ammatory markers have been examined, such as IL-6, TNF, and adhesion molecules (ICAM 1 , VCAM 1 , E selectin), but CRP has been the most extensively studied. Several observations have demonstrated that CRP is elevated in a signi?cant proportion of predialysis and ESRD patients on either hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis (3846). The reported proportion of patients with high CRP levels ranged from 32 to 42% in patients with chronic renal failure (45,46). Elevated CRP levels have been reported in 2145% of patients on dialysis replacement therapy (38,40). In addition, the increase in CRP levels has been shown to be related to renal function in patients with chronic renal failure not on dialysis: the lower the creatinine clearance, the higher the CRP levels (47). The uremic state is clearly associated with an altered immune response (48). A wide variety of factors in chronic renal failure and especially in hemodialysis are capable of stimulating monocyte/macrophages to induce cytokine release. Several studies have reported that proinflammatory cytokines are increased in uremic predialysis and dialysis patients . This suggests that uremia per se may cause a proin?ammatory status with ongoing acute phase response. In the proinflammatory background of uremia, extracorporeal circulation of blood during hemodialysis may act as a fresh stimulus and induce acute phase response.

The exact mechanism of how inflammation leads to atherosclerosis is poorly understood. The current hypothesis is that in?ammation causes endothelial injury or dysfunction, leading to leukocyte and platelet activation and adhesion to endothelial cells, smooth muscle proliferation, and eventual plaque formation (34). In addition, inflammation may also modify plasma protein and lipid composition to favor atherosclerosis.
CRP has been reported to constitute an independent risk factor for cardiovascular events in the general population free of chronic renal disease. CRP levels have also been shown to correlate with outcome following acute MI  or during unstable angina pectoris in nonrenal patients.

In keeping with the literature from the general population, there is a growing body of data in patients with renal disease linking in?ammatory markers and CVD. Several in?ammatory markers have been exam- ined (e.g., IL-6, TNF, and adhesion molecules) (45,69,70), but the best evidence has been obtained with CRP. Two cross sectional studies demonstrated that elevated CRP levels are associated with surrogate markers for atherosclerotic vascular disease in both HD and predialysis patients (38,46). Cardiovascular Extended Evaluation in Dialysis (CREED) investigators showed that CRP was an independent predictor of the number of atherosclerotic plaques in carotid arteries of 112 chronic HD patients (38).  detected a signi?cantly increased intima media thickness in carotid arteries of predialysis patients with elevated CRP levels (CRP greater than 10 mg/ L) compared with patients with CRP levels less than 10 mg/L (46). In addition, two prospective studies have examined the association between CRP levels and cardiovascular mortality in HD (71,72). Both studies found that cardiovascular mortality was signi?cantly increased with increasing levels of CRP. In the study by Zimmerman et al. (71), patients in the highest CRP quartile had a relative risk of cardiovascular mortality of 5.48 compared with those in the lowest quartile. Similarly, an increase in all cause mortality has also been reported to be associated with elevated CRP levels in patients on dialysis (40,42). Thus, there is a growing body of evidence suggesting that in?ammatory markers are predictive of CVD in patients with chronic renal failure.

Recently, attention has focused on the effects of aspirin and statins on in?ammatory markers and CVD. In nonrenal patients, several studies have examined the relationship between CVD outcome and treatment with aspirin or statins. Ridker et al. (76) showed that the magnitude of the heart disease bene?ts of a daily aspirin regimen was directly related to the CRP level: the higher the CRP levels, the greater the bene?t of aspirin. In another study, Ridker et al.  reported that the reduction in CAD risk associated with statin therapy was greater in those subjects with elevated CRP levels than in those with normal CRP. In addition, CRP levels decreased among patients allocated to statin therapy (pravastatin), whereas it remained unchanged or in- creased in those allocated to placebo. Such a reduction in CRP levels with statin therapy has also been reported in other trials  and in hemodialysis patients . In a randomized controlled trial , treatment with simvastatin was associated with a 47% reduction in median CRP levels in hemodialysis patients.
 Thus, there is some evidence that aspirin and statins may modulate the in?ammatory response associated with the development of atherosclerosis. Beyond the effects for which they have been designed, aspirin and statins may favorably affect atherogenesis through modulation of in?ammatory response. However, it is impossible to provide ?rm treatment recommendations. No evidence exists that therapeutic interventions aimed at modulating inflammatory response are associated with improved cardiovascular outcomes in subjects with CKD. At present, it appears reasonable to recommend the use of aspirin for patients with evidence of CVD and for those who are at high risk of developing CVD. In addition, for patients who require treatment of dyslipidemia, statins may be the preferred lipid lowering agents.

Increasing attention has been drawn to hyperhomocysteinernia in the last decade because of its proposed role in the development and/or progression of atherothrombotic disease. Mild to moderate hyperhomocysteinernia is observed in approximately 6(L70% of subjects with chronic renal disease and in more than 90% of patients with ESRD undergoing maintenance dialysis . Renal function is an important determinant of the total plasma total homocysteine concentration. It has been unequivocally shown that declining renal function is associated with higher plasma homocysteine . The inverse relationship between plasma homocysteine and GF R seems to be independent of the primary renal disease and is present throughout the whole range of renal function, extending from normal to ESRD.

The etiology of hyperhomocysteinemia in renal failure remains largely unexplained. There is no signi?cant excretion of homocysteine in the urine (80). Animal studies have demonstrated significant renal uptake and metabolism of homocysteine. However, the relevance of these findings in humans has been questioned and renal metabolism of homocysteine appears marginal in humans. Therefore, impairment in extrarenal homocysteine metabolism is the likely cause of hyperhomocysteinemia in patients with renal failure.
 The metabolism of homocysteine occurs by remethylation and transsulfuration (86). One of the remethylation pathways requires methylene tetra hydrofolate reductase (MTHFR). Several studies have demonstrated that the MTHFR genotype in?uences homocysteine levels in the normal population and in subjects with kidney disease. Impairment of the remethylation pathways of homocysteine has been demonstrated in uremia and is probably central to the pathogenesis of hyperhomocysteinemia in CKD. However, the exact nature of this impairment remains undefined.

Epidemiologic studies suggest that hyperhomocysteinemia is a risk factor for atherosclerotic CVD, stroke, peripheral arterial occlusive disease and venous throm- bosis in the general population. Crosssectional and prospective observational studies suggest a graded association between total homocysteine and the risk of experiencing a CVD event in ESRD patients. In a recent study involving 175 chronic HD patients, homocysteine was found to be a strong and independent predictor of fatal and nonfatal atherothrombotic events (93). The risk of these events was 8.2 times higher (95% con?dence interval [CI]  in patients in the highest homocysteine tertile than in those in the lowest tertile (93). Data from three other prospective investigations involving ESRD patients yielded similar results (7,91,92). When data from these three investigations were pooled, the combined relative risk for incident (de novo) or recurrent CVD comparing the upper to the lowest tertile of fasting homocysteine was 2.8 (95% CI 1.6 5.0). In patients with chronic renal failure not on dialysis, a significant association between homocysteine and the development of arteriosclerotic CVD has also been reported.

The pathologic mechanisms by which hyperhomocysteinemia promotes atherosclerosis remain unclear . Experimental data support a range of possibilities, including endothelial cell injury , enhanced LDL oxidation , increased thromboxane mediated platelet aggregation, inhibition of the anticoagulant protein C , and promotion of smooth muscle cell proliferation . Hyperhomocysteinemia potentiates endothelial dysfunction and oxidative stress cell injury. In addition, homocysteine interferes with the coagulation system and thus also has prothrombotic effects.

Treatment with the recommended daily allowances of folic acid and vitamins B6 and B12, which consistently normalizes total homocysteine levels in the general population free of chronic renal disease, rarely results in the normalization of homocysteine levels in patients with advanced renal failure. A large number of investigations now have shown that even grossly supraphysiologic doses of folic acid alone or in combi- nation with vitamins B6 and B12 fail to normalize homocysteine levels in more than two thirds of maintenance dialysis patients with baseline hyperhomocysteinemia (92,10(L108). Conversely, such treatment consistently normalizes homocysteine levels among hyperhomocysteinemic patients with mild to moderate renal insu?iciency or chronic stable renal transplant recipients. Data from intervention studies do not support the need for folate supplementation at doses greater than 5 10 mg/day . Administration of folinic acid (an immediate precursor of methyltetra hydrofolate and pyridoxine appears promising in preliminary studies, but will require further validation from clinical trials.

No trials have been able to show that lowering homocysteine levels improves cardiovascular outcome. Three recent studies in ESRD patients on dialysis failed to demonstrate an association between homocysteine reduction and improvement in surrogate endpoints for atherosclerosis . Thus, in the absence of data from randomized controlled trials demonstrating a reduction in CVD with successful correction of hyperhomocysteinemia, firm recommendations are dificult to provide for screening and treatment of mild hyperhomocysteinemia in patients with chronic renal disease.
 Oxidative stress is de?ned as an imbalance between formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and antioxidant defense mechanisms. ROS such as hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) or hypochlorous acid (HOCl), and free radicals such as superoxide , hydroxyl radical (OH), and nitric oxide (NO) are continuously formed in vivo. Generation of ROS plays a key role in the normal host response against pathogens and tumoral cells . Thus, detection of ROS per se does not de?ne oxidative stress. Oxidative stress is said to exist when there is increased generation of ROS, de?cient antioxidant reserve, or both, leading to increased levels of peroxidized end products measured in tissue or blood. A number of enzymatic and nonenzymatic antioxidant mechanisms have evolved to detoxify or metabolize ROS. Vitamin E, vitamin C, selenium, and zinc are the major nonenzymatic antioxidants. Superoxide dismutase and glutathione peroxidase are the major enzymatic antioxidants. Oxidative stress is thought to play an important role in CVD because it generates lipid peroxidation products, including oxidized lipoproteins, which are consistently found in fatty streaks and advanced atherosclerotic lesions.

There is a consensus that increased oxidative stress is part of the uremic milieu . Enhanced oxidative stress may be identified by an increase in the products of lipid peroxidation (e.g., malondialdehyde, thiobarbituric acid reactive substances, F2 isoprostanes), a decrease in substances that enhance oxidative resistance (e.g., plasmalogen), or a decrease in reducing substances (e.g., glutathione). There is evidence for all of the above in patients with chronic renal failure . In addition, the dialysis process itself may contribute to increased oxidative stress. Excessive production of ROS may result from bioincompatibility with dialyzer membrane or dialysis tubing. Furthermore, depletion of antioxidants due to dialytic removal or insu?icient intake or decreased activity have been reported in dialysis patients. Thus, both increased ROS generation and decreased antioxidant defenses have been implicated in the pathogenesis of oxidative stress in ESRD patients. None of the studies published on oxidative stress markers in subjects with CKD are population based. Therefore, the prevalence of oxidative stress among predialysis and ESRD patients remains largely undetermined. In addition, the lack of standardized tests to determine the presence of increased oxidative stress complicates the interpretation of the literature and contributes to contradicting data. Most studies in subjects with CKD, however, reported a progressive increase in oxidative stress markers with declining renal function. Recently data have identi?ed the oxidation of lipoproteins as a key step in the initiation of atherogenesis . Free radicals also impair the myocardium contractile function . In addition, ROS are implicated in cell signaling, gene transcription, mitosis, apoptosis, and vasoconstriction (12(r128). Therefore increased oxidative stress may mediate atherogenesis, myocardial dysfunction, and vascular modeling and hypertrophy.

Several in depth reviews exist of the role of oxidative stress in the genesis of atherosclerosis. The initial event in all proposed models is endothelial injury, which allows plasma lipids and in?ammatory cells to access the subintimal space in the vascular wall. ROS elaborated by the in?ammatory cells oxidize LDL , which is recognized and ingested by the macrophage monocyte scavengers. Macrophages become massively loaded with oxidized LDL, forming foam cells, a key component of the nascent atheroma.
 In addition to its pivotal role in foam cell formation, oxidized LDL subtends many other functions in promoting atherosclerosis. Oxidized LDL injures adjacent endothelium, causing up regulation of endothelin, down regulation of nitric oxide, and expression of adhesion molecules that promote margination of platelets and monocytes. In addition, oxidized LDL also promotes endothelial cell apoptosis and indu- ces migration and proliferation of smooth muscle cells (140). The importance of oxidative stress is further supported by observations that antioxidants, in particular vitamin E, protect against lipoprotein oxidation, endothelial cell dysfunction, and progression of atherosclerosis in experimental models.Increased oxidative stress has been closely associated with myocardial dysfunction in experimental and clinical studies. In animal models of congestive heart failure, myocardial failure correlated tightly with desreased antioxidant enzyme activity . Vitamin E supplementation attenuated the severity of the heart failure in these models . Studies in humans are less frequent, but have also documented a tight correlation between severity of heart failure and oxidative stress. It is fairly plausible, therefore, that the increased oxidative stress associated with renal failure may contribute to uremic cardiomyopathy.

There are few clinical endpoint studies examining the relationship between oxidative stress markers and cardiac disease in patients with CKD . These studies suggest that levels of oxidative stress markers correlate with the occurrence and severity of CVD. Hmodialysis patients in the highest compared with the lowest tertile of malondialdehyde (MDA) were nearly three times as likely to have prevalent CVD. The odds ratio for CVD in the highest versus lowest tertile of MDA level was 2.71  (153,154). In addition, in a study by Usberti et al. (156), there was a positive correlation between oxidative stress markers and the severity of CVD in hemodialysis patients.

 Studies using antioxidant treatment to prevent vascular disease revealed equivocal effects in nonrenal patients. No clinical endpoint studies using various antioxidant treatments clearly showed a bene?cial effect on total mortality in the general population. Since renal patients live under particularly pro oxidative conditions, the question arises whether there may be particular bene?t of antioxidant treatment for this subset of patients. Several studies have reported that the administration of antioxidants, including vitamins E and C, reduces markers of oxidative stress in uremic individuals. Unfortunately, only a few antioxidant intervention studies with clinical endpoints have been published to date. The use ofvitamin E coated dialyzers has been shown to result in a signi?cant decrease in measured oxidized LDL, malondialdehyde, and aortic calcification as an index for the progression of atherosclerosis (165). In the SPACE study, the effect of high dose vitamin supplementation (800 IU/day) on CVD was investigated in hemodialysis patients. Vitamin E supplementation over 2 years resulted in a signi?cant reduction of cardiovascular events including MI, without effects on cardiovascular and total mortality.

 Thus there is some evidence that antioxidant treatment may be effective in the prevention of CVD in renal patients. However, it is impossible to provide firm recommendations regarding antioxidant therapy in patients with CKD. At present, it is reasonable to provide the recommended daily allowances but not pharrnacologic doses of vitamins E and C to patients on dialysis to replace vitamins lost during the dialysis procedure.

 Other potential uremia related or nontraditional cardiac risk factors have been reported. Recent advances in basic science have suggested that apoptosis of cellular components of the vessel wall plays a pivotal role in the development of atherosclerosis. Results from clinical studies suggest that elevated circulating levels of apoptosis related molecules, namely soluble F as (sFas) and soluble F as ligand (SF as L), represent new potential biomarkers of CVD. Cross sectional studies have reported an association between elevated sFas and sFas L levels and evidence of CVD in subjects with hypertension and patients with CKD. In a cross sectional study involving hypertensive patients. reported that SF as L levels correlate with carotid artery intima media thickness, a surrogate of atherosclerosis.They reported that plasma sFas levels correlate with a positive history of coronary artery disease and peripheral vascular disease in chronic hemodialysis patients. Although con?rmation with larger epidemiologic studies is required, these results suggest that elevated circulating levels of apoptosis ,related molecules represent new potential risk factors of CVD.

 Other potential uremia related or nontraditional cardiac risk factors include increased prothrombotic factors, metabolic acidosis, hypokalemia, and carnitine insu?iciency (175). However, the signi?cance of many of these factors with regard to cardiac risk remains to be elucidated in clinical endpoint studies with appropriate design and large number of patients.

Conclusion
 Growing evidence has been gathered over the last 15 years on the role of dyslipidemia, in?ammation, hyperhomocysteinemia, and oxidant stress in the pathogenesis of CVD in subjects with CKD. However, the exact role of each of these factors in the development of CVD is very di?icult to distinguish because all are closely interrelated. In addition, the clinical signi?cance of many of these factors remains to be further elucidated in clinical endpoint studies. Randomized controlled trials will be needed to evaluate whether interventions aimed at correcting these urerr1ia related risk factors will bring improved cardiovascular outcome in patients with renal disease. Results from such clinical trials are necessary before firm recommendations are provided regarding the management of these cardiovascular risk factors.
 Chronic kidney disease(CKD) is a worldwide public health  problem. In the United States, there is a rising incidence and prevalence of kidney failure, with poor outcomes and high cost. The number of individuals with kidney failure treated by dialysis and transplantation exceeded 320000 in 1998 and is expected to surpass 650 000 by 2010. There is an even higher prevalence of earlier stages of CKD. Kidney failure requiring treatment with dialysis or transplantation is the most visible outcome of CKD. However, cardiovascular disease (CVD) is also frequently associated with CKD, which is important because individuals with CKD are more likely to die of CVD than to develop kidney failure, CVD in CKD is treatable and potentially preventable, and CKD appears to be a risk factor for CVD. In 1998, the National Kidney Foundation (N KF) Task Force on Cardiovascular Disease in Chronic Renal Disease issued a report emphasizing the high risk of CVD in CKD. This report showed that there was a high prevalence of CVD in CKD and that mortality due to CVD was 10 to 30 times higher in dialysis patients than in the general population. The major goal of this statement is to review CKD as a risk factor for development of CVD. As background, we shall also review the definition of CKD and classification of stages of severity of CKD, the spectrum of CVD in CKD and differences from the general population, and risk factors for CVD in CKD.  Definition and Classification of Stages of Severity and Types of CKD In 2002, the NKF published clinical practice guidelines on evaluation, classification, and risk stratification in CKD? In these guidelines, CKD is defined as either (1) kidney damage for 23 months, as confirmed by kidney biopsy or markers of kidney damage, with or without a decrease in glomerular filtration rate (GFR), or (2) GFR <60 mLmin" per 1.73 m2 for 23 months, with or without kidney damage .  Kidney damage is ascertained by either kidney biopsy or markers of kidney damage, such as proteinuria, abnormal urinary sediment, or abnormalities on imaging studies. The finding of proteinuria not only defines the presence of CKD but also has important implications for diagnosis of the type of kidney disease and is associated with a worse prognosis for both kidney disease progression and the development of CVD. Proteinuria is variously defined . Measurement of albumin-to-creatinine ratio or total protein to creatinine ratio in untimed spot urine samples is recom- mended for assessment of proteinuria  GFR <60 mL - min" per 1.73 m2 is selected as the cutoff value for definition of CKD because it represents a reduction by more than half of the normal value of --125 mL - min" per 1.73 m2 in young men and women, and this level of GFR is associated with the onset of laboratory abnormalities characteristic of kidney failure, including increased preva- lence and severity of several CVD risk factors. Estimation of GFR from serum creatinine and prediction equations includ- ing age, sex, race, and body size is recommended to avoid the misclassification of individuals on the basis of serum creati- nine alone Kidney failure is defined as GFR <15 mL - min" per 1.73 ml or treatment by dialysis. Approximately 98% of patients beginning dialysis for CKD in the United States have an estimated GFR of <15 mL - min" per 1.73 m2.25 This definition is not synonymous with end stage renal disease, which is an administrative term in the United States signify- ing eligibility for coverage by Medicare for payment for dialysis and transplantation.  Among individuals with CKD, the stage of severity is based on the level of GFR. The prevalence of kidney failure (--300 000, or 0.1% of the US adult population) is considerably less than the prevalence of earlier stages of CKD (~20 million, or 10.8% of the US adult population).  Diagnosis of CKD is traditionally based on pathology and etiology. A simplified classification, which we shall use in this article, emphasizes diseases in the native kidney, which can be broadly divided as diabetic and nondiabetic in origin, and kidney diseases in the transplant. Spectrum of CVD in CKD and Differences From the General Population In this section, we consider arterial vascular disease and cardiomyopathy as the primary types of CVD . In CKD, it is useful to consider 2 subtypes of arterial vascular disease, namely, atherosclerosis and large vessel remodeling or arteriosclerosis. Atherosclerosis is an intimal disease characterized by the presence of plaques and occlusive lesions. There is a high prevalence of atherosclerosis in CKD. Atherosclerotic lesions in kidney failure are frequently calcified, as opposed to fibroatheromatous, and have increased media thickness compared with lesions in the general population.Surrogates of atherosclerosis include both intimamedia thickness of the carotid wall that is detectable by ultrasound and inducible myocardial ischemia that is detectable by coronary stress tests. Electron-beam computed tomography is a sensitive method to detect vascular calcification but may not be an ideal method to detect atherosclerosis in CKD, because it is unable to distinguish between intimal calcifications of atherosclerosis and medial calcification that is common in CKD. Clinical presentations of atherosclerosis include ischemic heart disease, namely, angina, myocardial infarction, and sudden cardiac death, which is common in CKD, and cerebrovascular disease, peripheral vascular disease, or heart failure.  Stress imaging is an important modality for testing for myocardial ischemia. A recent meta-analysis reveals that stress imaging is of value in predicting CVD morbidity and mortality in kidney transplantation candidates treated by dialysis. It remains unknown, however, whether the diagnostic accuracy of these tests, as defined by a gold standard of angiographic obstructive coronary artery disease, is different from the general population. Furthermore, it remains unknown whether stress nuclear or stress echocardiographic testing is more accurate in patients with CKD.  Dialysis patients with ischemic heart disease may not necessarily have large vessel coronary disease. In one study, up to 50% of nondiabetic dialysis patients with symptoms of myocardial ischemia did not have large vessel coronary artery disease (defined as luminal narrowing of >50% of major coronary vessels). The authors hypothesized that the patients may have ischemia secondary to the combined effects of volume overload and left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH), which causes increased oxygen demand, and small vessel coronary disease, which causes decreased oxygen supply. It needs to be acknowledged, however, that the latter study was performed in the pre-erythropoietin era, during which hemoglobin levels were lower, which also may have contributed to ischemia; therefore, the results may not be generalizable to current practice. Patients with CKD also have a high prevalence of arterio- sclerosis and remodeling of large arteries.Remodeling may be due either to pressure overload, which is distinguished by wall hypertrophy and an increased wall-to-lumen ratio, or flow overload, which is characterized by a proportional increase in arterial diameter and wall thickness. Remodeling often accompanies a reduction in arterial compliance, which can be detected through measurement of aortic pulse wave velocity and characteristic impedance.3435 Noncompliant vessels may result in increased systolic blood pressure, increased pulse pressure, LVH, and decreased coronary perfusion. Both decreased aortic compliance and increased pulse pres- sure have been found to be independent risk factors for CVD in dialysis patients.  Patients with CKD also have a high prevalence of cardiomyopathy  Hypertension and arteriosclerosis result in pressure overload and lead to concentric LVH (increased wall-to-lumen ratio), whereas anemia, fuid overload, and arteriovenous fistulas result in volume overload and primarily lead to left ventricular dilatation with LVH (a proportional increase in left ventricular mass and diameter). These structural abnormalities may lead to diastolic and systolic dysfunction and may be detectable by echocardiography. Clinical presentations of cardiomyopathy include heart failure and ischemic heart disease, even in the absence of arterial vascular disease. Diagnosis of heart failure may be challenging in dialysis patients because salt and water retention may be treated by ultrafiltration during dialysis, often leaving other signs and symptoms, such as decreased blood pressure, fatigue, and anorexia, as the only clues to its presence. On the other hand, salt and water retention may refleect inadequate ultrafiltration rather than heart failure or a combination of both heart failure and inadequate ultrafiltration. Indeed, one of the major causes of inadequate ultrafiltration during dialysis is hypotension, which may be a manifestation of heart failure. Regardless of the cause, heart failure is a powerful risk factor for adverse outcomes in dialysis patients, which suggests that it is usually a manifestation of advanced CVD. Left ventricular mass  index is dependent on volume status; therefore, there is a need for standardized assessments of left ventricular function in hemodialysis patients. CVD Risk Factors in CKD  In subjects with CKD, for the purposes of this discussion, we classify CVD risk factors as either traditional or nontraditional , and we define traditional risk factors as those in the Framingham Heart Study that have been used to estimate the risk of developing symptomatic ischemic heart disease. Most of the traditional CVD risk factors, such as older age, diabetes mellitus, systolic hypertension, LVH, and low high density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol, are highly prevalent in CKD. The cardiovascular risk conferred by many traditional risk factors, such as diabetes,5 older age and LVH, largely parallels the relationships described in the general population, although some important differences have been noted with regard to other risk factors. For example, U-shaped relationships exist between all-cause mortality and both blood pressure and cholesterol levels in dialysis patients (Figure 2). The increased risk at lower levels of blood pressure and cholesterol may refleect confounding from cardiomyopathy and malnutrition, respectively, although this has not been proved. In support of the latter, hypertension was a risk factor for the development of LVH, heart failure, and ischemic heart disease but not mortality in a Canadian cohort of dialysis patients.Several cross-sectional studies have suggested that the Framingham risk equation is insufficient to capture the extent of CVD risk in subjects with CKD.There are 2 interpretations for these findings. First, other factors (nontraditional risk factors) that are not included in Framingham risk equations may play an important role in promoting ischemic    Traditional Risk Factors are Older age , Male sex , Hypertension, Higher LDL cholesterol Lower HDL cholesterol, Diabetes , Smoking , Physical inactivity , Menopause , Family history of CVD and LVH. Nontraditional Factors are Albuminuria , Homocysteine , Lipoprotein(a) and apolipoprotein(a) isoforms , Lipoprotein remnants , Anemia , Abnormal calcium/phosphate metabolism , Extracellular fluid volume overload , Electrolyte imbalance , Oxidative stress Inflammation (Creactive protein), Malnutrition , Thrombogenic factors , Sleep disturbances , Altered nitric oxide and endothelin balance.    heart disease in subjects with CKD. Second, traditional risk factors may have a qualitatively and quantitatively different risk relationship with CVD in CKD compared with the general population. For example, individuals with CKD may have had a longer and more severe exposure to hypertension than subjects without CKD. In addition, subjects with CKD may have been treated for hypertension, and the Framingham risk equation does not take into account dose or years of treatment with antihypertensive medications. To define a nontraditional factor as a risk factor, all of the following conditions ideally should be met: (1) biological plausibility as to why the factor may promote CVD risk; (2) demonstration that the risk factor level increases with severity of kidney disease; (3) demonstration of an association between the risk factor and CVD in CKD in observational studies; and (4) demonstration in placebo-controlled clinical trials that treatment of the risk factor decreases CVD out- comes. Although conditions 1 and 2 are met for the most part when one considers the nontraditional risk factors , there remain many gaps in the CKD literature regarding condition 3, and particularly condition 4. This is, therefore, an active area of research.  Several nontraditional factors, such as hyperhomocysteine- mia, oxidant stress, dyslipidemia, and elevated in?ammatory markers, are associated with atherosclerosis, and 2 recent reviews suggest that oxidant stress and in?ammation may be the primary mediators or the missing link that explains the    tremendous burden of CVD in CKD. Other factors such as anemia are associated with cardiomyopathy, whereas abnormal calcium and phosphorus metabolism is associated with vascular remodeling and development of noncompliant vessels. As mentioned above, although many of these putative risk factors are associated with increased risk for either all-cause mortality or CVD in various stages of CKD,for the most part, their causal relationship to CVD has not yet been proved in clinical trials. However, 3 important clinical trials include the following. The Normal Hematocrit Trial enrolled --1300 hemodialysis patients with ischemic heart disease or heart failure and randomized them to a predialysis hematocrit goal of either 30% or 42% with the use of erythropoietin.59 The higher hematocrit group had a higher (although not significantly) incidence of all-cause mortality and myocardial infarction, the primary end point. The Secondary Prevention with Antioxidants of Cardiovascular Disease in End-Stage Renal Disease (SPACE) Study randomized 196 hemodialysis patients with CVD to 800 U of vitamin E or placebo. The vitamin E group had a lower incidence of the primary end point, which was a composite of myocardial infarction (both fatal and nonfatal), ischemic stroke, peripheral vascular disease, and unstable angina. Finally, a recent controlled trial randomized 134 hemodialysis patients to either 600 mg of oral acetylcysteine (an antioxidant) twice per day or placebo.Those patients randomized to acetylcysteine had a lower incidence of the primary end point, which was a composite of fatal and nonfatal myocardial infarction, CVD death, need for coronary angioplasty or coronary artery bypass surgery, ischemic stroke, and peripheral vascular disease manifested by either amputation or need for angio- plasty. Although the latter 2 studies should be interpreted with caution because they were small and are not consistent with studies in the general population, it is important to recognize that dialysis patients have higher levels of oxidant stress and inflammation than the general population; there- fore, the results are provocative and need to be followed up in larger trials.  CVD in Kidney Failure  CVD mortality is ~10 to 30 times higher in patients treated by dialysis than in patients in the general population, despite stratification for sex, race, and the presence of diabetes.5 After stratification for age, CVD mortality remains --5-fold higher in dialysis patients than in the general population, even at the extremes of age (Figure 1). The high mortality rate is likely due to both a high case fatality rate and a high prevalence of CVD.  A high case fatality rate in dialysis patients has been observed after acute myocardial infarction and in patients with heart failure. Mortality 1 and 2 years after myocardial infarction was 59% and 73%, respectively, in dialysis patients (Figure 3),73 which is much higher than after acute myocar- dial infarction in the general population, even in subjects with comorbid conditions such as diabetes. For example, in the Worcester Heart Attack Study, approximately three fourths of diabetic men and two thirds of diabetic women discharged after an acute myocardial infarction were still alive 2 years   later. In another study in dialysis patients, median survival was only 18 months after development of de novo heart failure, which is also far higher than observed in the general population.  The prevalences of atherosclerosis, heart failure, and LVH are extremely high in hemodialysis patients .5 Approximately 40% of incident hemodialysis patients have clinical evidence of ischemic heart disease or heart failure. In addition, the prevalence of LVH in incident dialysis patients is high. In the Canadian Prospective Cohort Study of 433 incident dialysis patients, 74% had LVH at baseline, 44% had concentric LVH, 30% had hypertrophy with left ventricular dilatation, and 15% had systolic dysfunction.CVD in Kidney Transplant Recipients CVD accounts for 35% to 50% of all-cause mortality in kidney transplant recipients and CVD mortality rates are at least twice as high as in an age-stratified sample of the general population but significantly lower than an age- stratified dialysis population .577 The 2 most likely explanations for the reduced risk in kidney transplant recip- ients compared with dialysis patients are selection bias for those undergoing transplantation and removal of the hemo- dynamic and uremic abnormalities associated with dialysis in those who receive transplants.  CVD morbidity is also higher in transplant recipients than in the general population even in comparisons with popula- tion samples with similar age and sex distributions. The prevalence of coronary artery disease is --15%, the preva- lence of LVH is 50% to 70%, 5 and the incidence of CVD is at least 3 to 5 times that of the general population. Risk factors for CVD in kidney transplant recipients are multiple. They include traditional CVD risk factors, such as hypertension, diabetes, hyperlipidemia, and LVH, which are highly prevalent, and nontraditional risk factors associated with reduced GFR, such as hyperhomocysteinemia or factors unique to transplantation itself, including the direct effects of immunosuppression or rejection. It has recently been demonstrated that although the Framingham risk equation predicts ischemic heart disease after kidney transplantation, it tends to underestimate the risks, especially the risk associated with diabetes.The latter effect is probably due to more severe diabetic vascular disease in patients with diabetic kidney disease.  CVD in Diabetic Kidney Disease  In this section, we primarily focus on microalbuminuria, because it is the earliest sign of kidney disease in diabetes. We define all patients as being in the highest risk groupfor future CVD events because of the presence of diabetes.  Microalbuminuria is associated with an increased prevalence of CVD risk factors. Although blood pressure may be normal in subjects with type 1 diabetes, a pattern of nondipping at night is frequently observed by 24-hour ambulatory blood pressure monitoring and may precede the development of microalbumin uria. Nondipping is a well-recognized CVD risk factor. Diabetic subjects with microalbuminuria also have an increased prevalence of dyslipidemia, poor glucose control, and increased blood pressure compared with diabetic patients without microalbuminun'a. There is a strong association between microalbuminuria (albuminuria) and CVD in cross-sectional analysis. This relationship has been found for surrogate measures, such as carotid intimamedia thickness and LVH,and different clinical presentations of CVD, such as coronary artery disease and peripheral vascular disease. The relationship between microalbuminuria (albuminuria) and clinical CVD has been confirmed in diverse racial/ethnic groups, including Koreans, American Indians, and Asian Indians.Although the relationship is present in both type 1 and type 2 diabetes, the relationship is generally stronger in type 2 diabetes because of the older age of individuals with this disease. Longitudinal studies also document that microalbuminuria is an adverse prognostic indicator for clinical CVD outcomes and all-cause mortality in subjects with diabetes. For example, in the Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation (HOPE) Study (subjects with vascular disease or diabetes plus another traditional risk factor at baseline), those with microalbuminuria and diabetes had a 1.97-fold (95% confidence interval 1.68 to 2.31) and 2.15-fold (95% confi- dence interval 1.78 to 2.60) increased risk for a composite outcome of myocardial infarction, stroke, or CVD death, as well as all-cause mortality, respectively, compared with subjects with diabetes without microalbuminuria. A recent pooled analysis of type 2 diabetes in 11 cohort studies showed that microalbuminuria was associated with an adjusted overall odds ratio for all-cause mortality of 2.4 (95% confidence interval 1.8 to 3.1) and for cardiovascular morbidity and mortality of 2.0 (95% confidence interval 1.4 to 2.7). There are several potential explanations for why the presence of microalbuminuria may be a risk factor for outcomes in diabetes. First, as discussed above, subjects with microalbuminuria have a higher prevalence of traditional risk factors than diabetic subjects without microalbuminuria. However, even after adjustment for other risk factors, the presence of microalbuminuria remains an adverse prognostic indicator. Second, microalbuminuria may re?ect generalized endothelial dysfunction and increased vascular permeability or abnormalities in the coagulation and fibrino- lytic systems. Third, microalbuminuria may be associated with in?ammatory markers. Fourth, microalbuminuria may denote the greater severity of end organ damage. Therefore, even if one adjusts for the presence of clinical CVD, the subject with microalbuminuria likely has more advanced disease. CVD in Nondiabetic Kidney Disease In this section, we focus on proteinuria and reduced GFR as manifestations of CKD. We consider proteinuria rather than microalbuminuria alone because studies have evaluated mi- croalbuminuria, albuminuria, dipstick proteinuria, or ne-  phrotic range proteinuria. Nephrotic syndrome in diabetic and nondiabetic individuals is associated with a number of disor- ders that have been implicated in CVD, such as extreme dyslipidemia and hypercoagulability, and is reviewed else- where.The goal of this review is to highlight the importance of lower levels of proteinuria.  We define a highestrisk population as one that is selected for already having CVD, other vascular disease, surrogates of CVD (such as LVH), or diabetes. An intermediate-risk population is one that is selected for having a traditional risk factor for CVD, such as increased age or hypertension. A low-risk population was defined as a community study.  Proteinuria As in subjects with diabetes, nondiabetic persons with mi- croalbuminuria have a higher prevalence of CVD risk factors (including dyslipidemia, increased blood pressure by 24-hour ambulatory blood pressure monitoring, heavier body size, insulin resistance, and a history of smoking) than subjects without microalbuminuria. There is a strong association between microalbuminuria and CVD in cross-sectional anal- ysis. For example, microalbuminuria is associated with sur- rogates of CVD, such as increased intima-media thickness of the carotid artery in hypertensive subjects, more frequent concentric LVH in hypertensive men, abnormal left ventricular geometry and mass in subjects with hypertension and LVH, and electrocardiographic evidence of myocardial ischemia. Subjects with microalbuminuria also have a higher prevalence of clinical CVD than those without microalbuminuria. As in subjects with diabetic kidney disease, the presence of proteinuria in nondiabetic individuals is, for the most part, independently associated with an increased risk for CVD events in longitudinal studies  Microalbuminuria in nondiabetic subjects in the HOPE study was associated with a 61% increased risk of the composite end point of stroke, myocardial infarction, or CVD death and a 2-fold increase in risk for all-cause mortality. In low-risk populations, however, the results have been less consistent. For example, in the Framingham Heart Study, the relative risk for CVD death or all-cause mortality for dipstick-positive proteinuria in women was similar to that in the HOPE study, but there was no significant independent association between dipstick-positive proteinuria and these outcomes in men.Conversely, in the Prevention of Renal and Vascular End Stage Disease (PREVEND) Study, a community study in the Netherlands, a doubling of urine albumin concentration was associated with a 29% increase in relative risk for CVD mortality.As in diabetic kidney disease, the presence of microalbuminuria in nondiabetic individuals may re?ect gen- eralized endothelial dysfunction or abnormalities of the fibrinolytic and coagulation pathways, may be a marker of in?ammatory status, or may denote the greater severity of the target end-organ damage.  Reduced GFR  Reduced GFR is associated with a high prevalence of CVD risk factors and a higher prevalence of CVD surrogates and clinical CVD. For example, several studies across a broad spectrum of populations, such as the HOPE study, the Cardiovascular Health Study (CHS), the Hypertension Opti- mal Treatment (HOT) Study, the Framingham and Framing- ham Offspring Studies, and the Atherosclerosis Risk In Communities (ARIC) Study, have shown that levels of systolic blood pressure and total cholesterol and the percent- age of subjects with low HDL cholesterol are greater in subjects with decreased GFR. In addition, the percentages of subjects with diabetes, electrocardiographic LVH, ischemic heart disease, and heart failure are higher in those with  decreased GFR. More recently, it has been demon- strated that the level of kidney function is also associated with the extent of demonstrable angiographic coronary disease. For example, in women with chest pain who undergo angiog- raphy, an elevated creatinine of 1.2 to 1.9 mg/dL is an independent predictor of significant angiographic coronary disease, as defined by a luminal narrowing of 50%.199  The prevalence of LVH is also inversely related to the level of GFR. In one study, the prevalence of LVH, as measured by echocardiography, was 45%, 31%, and 27% in patients with creatinine clearance of <25, 25 to 50, and >50 mL/min, respectively These percentages contrast sharply with the <20% prevalence of LVH in similar-aged patients in the general population. Reduced GFR is also associated with clinical CVD out- comes in prospective studies. It is important initially to consider the effect of reduced GFR on CVD outcomes without adjustment for other risk factors for 2 reasons. First, decreased GFR may be associated with other CVD risk factors and therefore may be useful for risk stratification in and of itself. Second, the adjusted analyses may inappropri- ately reduce the association between level of GFR and outcomes. That is, reduced GFR may result in more severe hypertension and dyslipidemia, and therefore one may over- correct for effects if factors in the causal pathway of lower GFR to CVD are included in statistical adjustments.  Without adjustment for other risk factors, a GFR of 30 mL - min per 1.73 m9 is associated with a CVD risk of 40%, compared with 15% associated with a GFR of 130 mL -per 1.73 m9. After adjustment for other CVD risk factors, a GFR of 30 mL - min per 1.73 m9 is associated with a CVD risk of 22%, compared with 15% associated with a GFR of 130 mL - min per 1.73 m9. The interpretation of this finding is that although much of the risk of CKD is due to its association with other CVD risk factors, the presence of CKD in and of itself remains an important independent risk factor for CVD outcomes.  Decreased GFR has consistently been found to be an independent risk factor for CVD outcomes and all-cause mortality in the highest risk populations. This is true in subjects with vascular disease or diabetes plus another CVD risk factor, after coronary artery bypass, after cardiac valve surgery, after myocardial infarction, in patients under- going percutaneous coronary interventions, in patients with unstable coronary syndromes, in patients presenting to the emergency ward with chest pain, and in patients with heart failure.T Furthermore, it appears that this increase in risk is present with even mild reduction in kidney function.  In high-risk populations, most but not all studies have suggested that decreased GFR is an independent risk factor for outcomes. This is true in the elderly, in whom even mild reductions of kidney function are associated with worse outcomes,197 in studies of subjects with hypertension, in studies of populations with a higher than normal prevalence of diabetes,165 and among older patients undergoing general surgery.169 In the Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial (MRFIT), the baseline creatinine level was not independently associated with CVD outcomes or all-cause mortality. How- ever, an increase in follow-up serum creatinine level at 6 years did predict adverse CVD outcomes.197 The authors postulated that the lack of association with baseline serum creatinine may have been due to a narrow range of serum creatinine levels at baseline.  In low-risk populations or community studies, the relation- ship between the level of kidney function and outcomes has not been as clear. In both the Framingham Study and the first National Health And Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES I), the level of kidney function was not an independent risk factor for CVD outcomes whereas in the ARIC Study and NHANES II, it was a risk factor for both CVD and all-cause mortality. Potential reasons for the discrepancies in the studies include differences in the study populations (for example, blacks were part of the ARIC study but not the Framingham studies), alternate measures to ascertain level of kidney function (serum creatinine is less sensitive than estimated GFR to detect small differences in level of kidney function and therefore may be less likely to detect an association in a low-risk population), and potential type II errors due to lower CVD event rates in community studies. Either way, it appears that the presence of reduced GFR is either not a risk factor or at most is a modest independent risk factor for CVD outcomes in low-risk populations. There are a number of possible explanations for the indepen- dent association of reduced GFR and CVD outcomes. First, a reduced GFR may be associated with an increased level of nontraditional CVD risk factors that frequently are not assessed in many studies. Second, reduced GFR may be a marker of undiagnosed vascular disease or alternatively a marker for the severity of diagnosed vascular disease, especially in high- or highest risk populations. Third, reduced GFR may be a measure of residual confounding from traditional CVD risk factors. For example, subjects with reduced GFR may have had more severe hypertension or dyslipidemia and therefore have suffered more vascular damage secondary to hypertension or dyslipidemia. Fourth, recent studies have suggested that subjects with reduced GFR are less likely to receive medications or therapies such as angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors, B-blockers, aspirin, platelet inhibitors, thrombolytics, or percutaneous intervention than patients with preserved GFR. Perhaps as important was the fact that in the same studies, patients with reduced GFR who did receive the above interventions obtained similar benefit as patients with preserved GFR. Finally, decreased GFR itself may be a risk factor for progression of ventricular remodeling and cardiac dysfunction.  The results in Tables 7 through 9 may be limited for the following reasons. First, negative results may not have been submitted or published, resulting in a publication bias. Sec- ond, we did not perform a systematic review to locate all studies for which the primary goal was the evaluation of the relationship between either proteinuria (albuminuria) or re- duced GFR and CVD outcomes. Third, there is a possibility that other studies of which we are not aware evaluated risk factors for CVD outcomes and included proteinuria (microal- buminuria) or level of kidney function in the multivariable analyses. Finally, we have not included studies for which the primary goal was the evaluation of risk factors for acute kidney failurefor example, after receiving intravenous contrast agents. These studies may be relevant, because reduced GFR is a strong risk factor for acute kidney failure and through this mechanism may lead to an increase in CVD events and all-cause mortality. Summary  There is a high prevalence of CVD in subjects with CKD. The presence of CKD, whether it is manifested by proteinuria (albuminuria) or reduced GFR, appears to be an independent risk factor for CVD outcomes, particularly in higher-risk populations. These findings are consistent with the NKF task force recommendation that patients with CKD should be considered in the highest risk group for CVD events. The seventh report of the Joint National Committee for the Prevention, Detection, Evaluation and Treatment of High Blood Pressure (JNC-7) includes CKD as a compelling indication, justifying lower target blood pressure and treat- ment with specific antihypertensive agents.Similarly, the recently published NKF-K/DOQI Clinical Practice Guide- lines on Managing Dyslipidemia in Chronic Kidney Disease recommend that all patients with CKD be included in the highest risk group, justifying a lower target low density lipoprotein cholesterol level. By contrast, the third report of the Adult Treatment Panel of the National Cholesterol Education Program (ATP-III) does not include CKD in the list of high-risk conditions necessitating more aggressive manage- ment.197 We suggest that the National Cholesterol Education Program and other groups include CKD in the highest risk group for recommendations for prevention, detection, and treatment of CVD risk factors. In addition, these findings reinforce the recent recommendation from the NKF on the importance of early identification and treatment of CKD and its associated comorbid conditions. We suggest that the routine evaluation of patients with CVD or those at high risk for CVD include measurement of spot urine albumin to creatinine ratio or total protein-to-creatinine ratio and estimation of GFR by serum creatinine and prediction equations. Finally, there is an urgent need for additional randomized controlled studies to evaluate potential treatments of CVD in CKD.

 Heart failure is highly prevalent in the population
 with chronic kidney disease. Upon starting dialysis, 37% of
 patients will have had a previous episode of heart failure,
 doubling the risk of death. Both systolic and/or diastolic
 function may be impaired. 15% of patients starting dialysis
 therapy have systolic dysfunction of the left ventricle. The
 prevalence of diastolic dysfunction at dialysis inception is
 unknown, but is likely to be high. Either systolic or diastolic
 dysfunction can lead to clinically evident congestive heart
 failure. Hypertension and coronary heart disease are important causes of myocardial dysfunction in end-stage renal
 disease. Individuals with chronic kidney disease are at a very
 high risk for the development and progression of cardiovascular disease. The increased risk of cardiovascular disease
 is due to a higher prevalence of both traditional risk factors
 as well as nontraditional “uremia-related” risk factors. The
 prevalence of coronary artery disease (CAD) approaches
 40% among patients starting dialysis. About 70 - 80% of these
 patients have hypertension. Anaemia is a known risk factor
 for left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) and dilatation, heart
 failure and death. The diagnosis and treatment of heart
 failure in the patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD)
 are similar to that reccomended for patients without CKD.
 The potent drugs like ACE-I, AT-1 antagonists, - receptor
 antagonists are the main tools in nowadays treatment of
 CHF. New therapeutic regiments using natriuretic peptides
 are being evaluated in clinical settings.


 Introduction
 The cardiovascular system is closely related to function of
 the kidneys. Renal insufficiency can affect cardiac performance
 leading to its failure which consequently worsens renal function.
 The fact, that impairment of one component of the cardio-renal
 system aggravates dysfunction of the other is clinically very
 important.
 Heart failure (HF) is a specific term used to define the clinical syndrome when the heart is unable to pump enough blood
 to supply the metabolic needs of the body [1]. Subjects with
 myocardial failure can have symptomatic HF or asymptomatic
 ventricular dysfunction. Symptoms of exercise intolerance are
 typically assessed by the New York Heart Association (NYHA)
 functional classification.
 About half of all deaths in end-stage renal disease (ESRD)
 patients are attributable to cardiac causes [2]. Heart failure
 and coronary heart disease (CHD) are highly prevalent in this
 population.

 Epidemiology
 Upon starting dialysis, 37% of patients will have had a previous episode of heart failure, doubling the risk of death [3]. The
 remaining patients will develop heart failure at a rate of about
 10%/ year [4]. Both systolic and/or diastolic function may be
 impaired. 15% of patients starting dialysis therapy have systolic
 dysfunction of the left ventricle [5]. The prevalence of diastolic
 dysfunction at dialysis inception is unknown, but is likely to be
 high [6]. Either systolic or diastolic dysfunction can lead to clinically evident congestive heart failure (CHF). Risk factors for
 new onset CHF include hypertension, older age, anaemia and
 coronary heart disease [7]. Hypertension and CHD are important causes of myocardial dysfunction in ESRD.


 Coronary heart disease in patients with chronic kidney disease
 Individuals with chronic kidney disease are at a high risk
 for the development and progression of cardiovascular disease
 [8]. The prevalence of CAD approaches 40% among patients
 starting dialysis. 22% of them have stable angina, while 18% will
 have suffered from a prior myocardial infarction. The symptoms
 of myocardial ischaemia in dialysis patients are the same as
 those observed in other groups, although silent ischaemia
 may be more common because of the higher prevalence of
 diabetics [2]. The increased risk of cardiovascular disease is
 due to a higher rate of both traditional as well as nontraditional
 “uremia-related” risk factors [9].
 Most important traditional risk factors are: older age, male
 gender, hypertension, lipid abnormalities (increased level of
 total and LDL cholesterol, decreased level of HDL cholesterol),
 diabetes, smoking, physical inactivity, left ventricular hypertrophy, family history of cardiovascular disease.
 For the nontraditional risk factors we account: albuminuria,
 anaemia, abnormal calcium/phosphate metabolism, hyperhomocysteinemia, extracellular fluid volume overload, oxidative
 stress, inflammation, malnutrition, thrombogenic factors.
 CHD is usually the result of critical coronary artery disease,
 but in 27% of hemodialysis patients ischaemic symptoms are
 caused by other changes, like: small vessel disease (caused by
 hypertension, diabetes mellitus and calcium-phosphate deposition), reduced capillary density and abnormal myocyte bioenergetics [10]. LV hypertrophy predisposes to ischaemic symptoms
 by reducing coronary reserve.
 The patology of CHD in patients with renal insufficiency
 is complex. It’s important to note that, in uremic patients the
 atherosclerotic plaque is more calcified [11]. Morever not only
 epicardial arteries, but also small arterioles are involved in atherosclerosis. The left ventricular hypertrophy often coexists. In
 the beginning it is concentric, followed by excentric hypertrophy
 which leads to the dilatation of the left ventricle.
 The coronary flow reserve is decreased [12]. Increased
 concentration of NO inhibitors due to decreased accessibility
 of nitric oxide is present [13]. Hypertrophy and hyperplasia
 of the coronary vessels further limit its dilatation ability [14].
 Decreased amount of capillary vessels in myocardium impairs
 oxygen diffusion.
 The following risk factors lead to cardiomyopathy in patients
 with chronic kidney disease:
 • LV volume overload: salt and water overload, arteriovenous fistula, anaemia
 • LV pressure overload: hypertension, aortic stenosis,
 arteriosclerosis.
 Other causes are: hypoalbuminemia, small and large coronary vessel disease [15].

 Hypertension in patients with chronic
 kidney disease (CKD)
 About 70 - 80% of these patients have hypertension. The
 prevalence of high blood pressure increases as GFR declines [16]. Three out of four of patients starting dialysis have left
 ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) [17]. For dialysis patients,
 each 10 mmHg increment in blood pressure is associated with
 a 48% higher risk of LVH [18]. Risk factors for LVH apart
 from systolic blood pressure, include: anaemia, age and gender.
 Reducing blood pressure slows the rate of loss of renal function
 in CKD [6]. On the other hand NHANES III data suggest that
 in the majority of patients with renal insufficiency hypertension is poorly controlled. 2/3 of them had blood pressure
 > 140/ 90 mmHg. Only 11% individuals had adequate values.
 Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin
 receptor blockers should be considered the preferred antihypertensive agents. Calcium channel blockers are recommended to
 be used only as a part of a multidrug regimen in combination
 with ACE inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers [8]. Usually multidrug therapy is needed. According to the standards,
 the uremic patients require more intensive treatment of high
 blood pressure (INC VI):
 • individuals without proteinuria – less than 130/85 mmHg
 •individuals with proteinuria (> 1 g/day) and/or diabetes
 it should be lower – 125/75 mmHg.

 The optimal pressure values for dialysis patients is not clear,
 as low blood pressure has been associated with increased mortality in this group [19].
 It is worth to note that, in the Hypertension Optimal Treatment (HOT) trial participants with elevated baseline serum creatinine were two- to threefold more likely to experience a major
 or fatal CVD events compared to subjects with normal serum
 creatinine levels [20]. The prognostic significance of serum creatinine levels was also reported in the Heart Outcomes Evaluation Protection Study (HOPE) [21].

 Dyslipidemia in patients
 with chronic kidney disease (CKD)
 The most important abnormalities of uremic dyslipidemia
 are: elevated levels of trigliceryde trigliceryde-rich particles
 (VLDL and IDL) and LDL-cholesterol, increased Lp(a) lipoprotein level, low concentration of HDL-cholesterol. Total
 cholesterol level can be normal, although this is not the rule
 [22]. The prevalence of dyslipidemia in CKD is associated with
 the level of GFR and the level of proteinuria [23].
 The patients with CKD and hyperlipidemia should be
 treated according to the National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) guidelines [2]. The target LDL cholesterol level
 is 100 mg/dl. The HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins)
 are the most effective drugs. Fibrates are also effective, but
 they are excreted by the kidney, that is why dosage reduction
 is required.

 Anaemia in patients with CKD
 Anaemia is a special risk factor in patients with CKD. This
 fact well recognized by nephrologists is often unrealised by
 other specialists, also cardiologists. It influences left ventricular
 hypertrophy (LVH) and dilatation, heart failure and death [24].


 Anaemia with haemoglobin levels < 12 g/dl is present in more
 than half of patients with advanced heart failure. Its incidence
 increases with higher NYHA classes. Several observational studies have suggested that anaemia (haemoglobin levels 6 - 12 g/dl)
 is an independent predictor of mortality in dialysis patients [6].
 It has been shown that haemoglobin normalization may prevent
 progressive LV dilatation in patients with normal cardiac volumes at baseline [25]. Results of recent studies indicated that
 partial or complete correction of anaemia with erythropoietin
 decreases the cardiac output and heart rate, and induces a partial
 regression of the LVH, principally in relation with decreased left
 ventricular end-diastolic diameter [26]. Foley et al. postulated,
 that normalization of haemoglobin in haemodialysis patients
 with asymptomatic cardiomyopathy prevented the development
 of further left ventricle dilation [25]. The Canadian Normalization of Hemoglobin study (haemodialysis patients with either
 LVH or LV dilatation randomly treated to hemoglobin levels
 of 10 or 13.5 g/dl) showed that normalization of haemoglobin
 led to clinically significant improvements in quality of life, while
 survival rate were similar in both target groups [6].

 Hyperparathyroidism in patients with CKD
 High level of parathyroid hormone is an important factor
 in the genesis of myocardial fibrosis [27]. Hyperparathyroidism
 is associated with LV hypertrophy. Some studies have shown
 improvement in left ventricular function and size after parathyroidectomy [6].

 Diagnosis of heart failure in patients
 with CKD
 The diagnosis consists of:
 • symptoms of heart failure
 • declinations in physical examination
 • ECG
 • chest X-ray
 • echocardiogram.
 Echocardiography is the most important tool for the diagnosis of CHF in CKD patients. Especially echocardiography in
 the patients starting dialysis revealed a variety of abnormalities.
 Most common was concentric LV hypertrophy found in 42% of
 patients, eccentric LV hypertrophy in 23%, isolated LV dilatation
 in 4% and systolic dysfunction in 16%. Only 16% had a normal
 echocardiogram [28]. Similar data (about 75% patients with
 LVH) showed USRDS (United States Renal Data System) [29].
 However, LV volume fluctuates in haemodialysis patients.
 Therefore it is necessary to perform echocardiography at the
 patients “dry weight” – the day after dialysis. In patients with
 anaemia the increase in cardiac preload alters the pattern of Doppler signals that is used for the evaluation of diastolic function.

 Treatment of heart failure in patients
 with CKD [2]
 The data are lacking, because patients with significant renal
 impairment have been exluded from randomized studies. Few
 little trials indicated that ACE inhibitors and -receptor antagonists improve outcomes also for patients with heart failure in the
 CKD and ESRD populations.
 ACE Inhibitors are metabolized in kidneys, therefore their
 dose has to be adjusted according to the renal insufficiency.
 This, however, is not a problem in the case of the angiotensin
 II receptor type 1 (AT-1) antagonists, which are metabolized
 predominantly by liver. Nevertheless some of them, like
 valsartan, also require dose adjustments in advanced renal
 failure (GFR < 30 ml/min). A separate problem is the risk of
 hyperkalaemia and decrease of the glomerular filtration as the
 consequence of the inhibition of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. According to the guidelines, serum levels of potassium and creatinine should be initially monitored every 4 weeks
 and at least twice a year on a regular basis. A discontinuation of
 the drug should be considered when serum potassium exceeds
 5.5 mmol/L or creatinine increases more than 30% of the basal
 (pre-treatment) values [16].
 There was one prospective placebo-controlled trial – 114
 dialysis patients with dilated cardiomyopathy were randomized
 to receive either carvedilol or placebo in addition to standard
 therapy. All patients were followed up for two years. After two
 years, 51.7% of the patients died in the carvedilol group, compared with 73.2% in the placebo group (p < 0.01). These data
 suggest the use of carvedilol in all dialysis patients with chronic
 heart failure [30]. In such patients carvedilol has good kinetic
 characteristics – its hepatic metabolism does not require dose
 adjustments in case of impaired renal function.
 Loop diuretics are complying in patients with symptoms of
 CHF in renal failure. Their effect will be attenuated in cases
 with advanced renal insufficiency, but not as severly as thiazide
 diuretics, which usually become ineffective with a GFR less than
 30 ml/min. The effects of aldosterone antagonists are unpredictictable in patients with CKD – they can induce hyperkalemia, in
 combination with ACE inhibitors and -receptor antagonists in
 the setting of reduced GFR.
 It has been demonstrated that the use of diuretics alone, by
 reducing the effective plasma volume, results in further activation of the neurohormonal axis. The administration of diuretics
 rises activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system
 (RAAS). Multiple studies have shown that, when diuretics are
 used alone, one of their effects on the kidney is to significantly
 decrease glomerular filtration rate. Acute Decompensated
 Heart Failure National Registry (ADHERE) database indicates
 than more than 80% of patients are managed with diuretics.
 It makes sense when patients are congested. But it must be
 emphasized that diuretics are really a double-edged sword in
 heart failure. They activate neurohormones, they cause potassium loss, and they have detrimental effects on renal function.
 It is worth to note that, aggressive therapy for advanced
 heart failure can aggravate renal dysfunction. Estimation creatinine clearance may predict this situation better than baseline
 creatinine levels.


 Increased experience with natriuretic peptides suggests that
 their administration might facilitate diuresis with less compromise of renal function. Probably they can also limit the dilatation of the heart and maybe activation of pathways at a cellular
 and molecular level for cardiac remodeling.
 Each of modern medications alone causes a significant
 reduction in mortality; but the cumulative risk reduction when
 combined therapy (ACE-I, -receptor antagonists and aldosterone antagonists) is used brings a 66% risk reduction [31].
 Digoxin is useful in patients with atrial fibrillation and heart
 failure, and it improves exercise tolerance in nonuremic patients
 with symptomatic LV systolic dysfunction. Digoxin should be
 considered for similar patients with CKD or ESRD.

 Conclusions
 More than one a third of patients starting dialysis have clinical symptoms of heart failure. On the other hand, congestive
 heart failure is a common and crucial contributor to the progression of chronic renal disease. If we can help prevent renal
 dysfunction in heart failure, we are likely to be much more successful in dealing clinically with such patients. Therefore close
 cooperation between cardiologists and nephrologists is needed.
 The potent new drugs like ACE-I, -receptor antagonists and
 angiotensin receptor blockers are the main tools in nowadays
 treatment of CHF. New therapeutic regiments using natriuretic
 peptides are being evaluated in clinical settings.

 Aims To determine the prevalence and incidence of renal dysfunction (RD) in patients with chronic heart
failure (CHF), to identify contributory factors and predictors of worsening renal function (WRF), and to
explore the relationship between RD and mortality.
Methods and results Prospective data on 1216 patients with CHF were analysed. The glomerular ﬁltration rate (GFR) was used to determine renal function, and WRF was deﬁned as an increase in serum creatinine of .26.5 mmol/L (.0.3 mg/dL). The prevalence of RD deﬁned as a GFR of ,60 mL/min was 57%.
During 6 months, WRF occurred in 161 (13.0%) patients. Predictors of WRF were vascular disease, the
use of thiazide diuretics, and a baseline urea .9 mmol/L. Two hundred and sixty-three (21.6%) patients
died, and baseline RD and WRF both predicted a higher mortality (P , 0.001), whereas an improvement
in renal function over the ﬁrst 6 months predicted a lower mortality (hazard ratio 0.8, 95% conﬁdence
interval 0.6–1.0).
Conclusion In ambulatory patients with CHF, RD is common, commonly deteriorates over a relatively
short period of time, is unlikely to recover substantially, and augurs a poor prognosis.

Introduction
Chronic heart failure (CHF) is common, is an important
cause of hospitalizations, and is associated with signiﬁcant
morbidity and mortality.1 Despite some recent successes,
the prognosis of heart failure remains poor.2–4 Reports
from randomized controlled trials suggest that renal dysfunction (RD) is common in patients with heart failure and
is associated with an adverse prognosis.5,6 However,
these studies usually enrolled younger patients with fewer
co-morbidities than those managed in clinical practice.
Moreover, patients with signiﬁcant RD were often excluded
from the trials.7–12 Information on the prevalence and
natural history of RD in patients hospitalized due to worsening heart failure has been published,13–15 but few data from
epidemiologically representative cohorts of ambulatory
outpatients with CHF exist.
RD in patients with heart failure is multi-factorial. Renal
function may act as a barometer of cardiac function. As
heart failure progresses, preferential renal vasoconstriction occurs diverting blood away from the kidney to maintain
blood ﬂow to the heart, brain, and, during exercise, skeletal
muscle. A decline in arterial pressure combined with an
increase in venous pressure leads to a fall in the transrenal pressure gradient, and despite efferent arteriolar constriction, glomerular ﬁltration declines. However, disease of
the kidneys and cardiovascular system shares many common
aetiologies,16,17 and therefore renal parenchymal disease,
renovascular disease, and urinary obstruction may also be
important causes of RD in patients with heart failure.
RD may confer an adverse prognosis because it is a marker
of more severe vascular disease, greater age, worse cardiac
function, or greater likelihood of life-saving treatment being
withheld. Alternatively, or in addition, RD may cause salt
and water retention due to impaired nephron function and
reduced diuretic efﬁcacy. RD may also lead to failure to
excrete toxic substances such as oxidized catecholamines,
uric acid, and other uraemic factors.18 However, the effectiveness of interventions to improve renal function in
heart failure remains largely anecdotal and little advice is
given by guidelines for heart failure.19,20
Our aims were to determine the prevalence and incidence
of RD in a large community-based management programme for patients with CHF due to left ventricular systolic
dysfunction, to identify possible contributory factors and
predictors of worsening renal function (WRF), and to
explore the relationship between RD and mortality.

Methods
Ethical approval
All participants provided written informed consent, and the study
was carried out in accordance with the Helsinki Declaration II and
the European Standards for Good Clinical Practice. Ethical approval
was granted by the Local Research Ethics Committee.

Study design
This was a single centre, observational, prospective study. Crosssectional data were used to determine the prevalence of RD in
patients with CHF and left ventricular systolic dysfunction.
Longitudinal data were analysed to investigate the incidence of
RD, predictors of WRF, and their inter-relationship with prognosis.

Patients were identiﬁed from a community-based heart failure programme that accepts all patients with a suspected diagnosis of heart
failure or major cardiac dysfunction but retains only those in whom
the left ventricular ejection fraction is ,45% on echocardiography.
Heart failure is deﬁned as current symptoms of heart failure, or a
history of symptoms controlled by ongoing therapy, due to cardiac
dysfunction and in the absence of any more likely cause. The only
exclusion criteria for this study were the inability to provide
written consent, pregnancy, and renal replacement therapy with
dialysis or transplantation.

Clinical assessment
Clinical information obtained included past medical history and drug
and smoking history. Clinical examination included assessment of
height, weight, heart rate, rhythm, and blood pressure. Diabetes
was deﬁned as a previous diagnosis of this condition and subcategorized as requiring insulin, oral hypoglycaemic agent, or
diet-controlled. Hypertension and chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease were deﬁned as a prior history of receiving drug treatment
for these conditions. Patients with previous myocardial infarction,
coronary artery bypass surgery, positive tests for ischaemia, or coronary artery disease on angiography were considered to have
ischaemic heart disease (IHD). Vascular disease was deﬁned as a previous clinical diagnosis with investigations that identiﬁed one or
more of the following: peripheral vascular disease, renal artery stenosis, cerebrovascular disease, or abdominal aortic aneurysm.
Cardiomyopathy was deﬁned as the presence of left ventricular
systolic dysfunction in the absence of any known cause. Daily
doses of diuretics were expressed in furosemide equivalents (bumetanide 1 mg ¼ furosemide 40 mg). Doses of agents blocking the
renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system [both angiotensin-converting
enzyme (ACE)-inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers] were
expressed as the percentage of the maximum recommended daily
dose used in CHF patients.19,20 All medications were those that
the patients were taking at the time of referral to the heart
failure clinic. Blood tests included urea, creatinine, sodium, and
haemoglobin.

Follow-up
Following the baseline visit, all patients with a diagnosis of heart
failure were reviewed at approximately 3 and 6 months. Patients
not on optimal ACE-inhibition and/or beta-blocker therapy at baseline were seen at 2, 4, and 6 weeks for up-titration of their medications and followed up as above. Data collection was performed

between March 1999 and November 2003, but only patients who
survived more than 6 months were included in the analysis.

Assessment of renal function
We considered two different methods of assessing renal function.
These were the serum creatinine (SCr) and the glomerular ﬁltration rate (GFR) using the simpliﬁed modiﬁcation of diet in renal
disease (MDRD) prediction equation [186 Â SCr21.154 (mg/dL) Â
Age20.203 (years) Â 0.742 if female, Â1.212 if black].21,22

Deﬁnitions of RD and changes in renal function
The primary deﬁnition of RD was a GFR ,60 mL/min.6,23,24 We also
considered a SCr .130 mmol/L (1.5 mg/dL) as a marker of RD.25 For
the presentation of data, we divided patients into three groups
based upon the baseline SCr [normal 106 mmol/L ( 1.2 mg/dL),
minor increase 106–177 mmol/L (.1.2–2.0 mg/dL), marked
increase .177 mmol/L (.2.0 mg/dL)]26 and four groups based
upon the baseline GFR (normal !90 mL/min, mild impairment
60–89 mL/min, moderate impairment 30–59 mL/min, and severe
renal impairment 29 mL/min) to compare the clinical characteristics of patients with different severities of RD. These values
were deﬁned by the Kidney Disease Outcome Quality Initiative
guidelines.27
Changes in renal function were deﬁned using two methods. The
primary method used was an increase or decrease in SCr of
.26.5 mmol/L (.0.3 mg/dL), a convention previously used by
other groups.13–15,28 In addition, we also used a change in the GFR
category between normal, mildly impaired, moderately impaired,
and severely impaired, as mentioned above27 to assess changes in
renal function over a period of 6 months.

Statistical analysis
Continuous variables are presented as mean + standard deviation.
Categorical data are presented as percentages. Analysis of variance
was used for continuous data, whereas tests for trend were applied
across the three SCr categories and the four GFR categories,
respectively. The evaluation for linear trend in percentages was
carried out using the Cochrane–Armitage test.29
Multivariable logistic regression models for WRF were developed
using all baseline variables. Data from the logistic regressions are
presented as odds ratios with 95% conﬁdence intervals (CIs). The
odds ratio is an approximation to the relative risk.30,31 Models
were adjusted for length of follow-up because not all patients had
the same length of follow-up. We did not consider the duration of
heart failure as a potential variable due to the uncertainty of deﬁning the onset of the syndrome. All the continuous variables were
assessed for linearity by including a squared term. For all but one
baseline variable (GFR), the linearity assumption was satisﬁed.
However, our preference was to analyse all the continuous variables
by categories essential for presentation purposes. We checked for
co-linearity by calculating Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcients.
Model building was based on backwards elimination (P-value for
entry ¼ 0.05; P-value for removal ¼ 0.1). Backwards elimination is
preferable to forward selection.32 Models were validated using
re-sampling based on 10-fold cross-validation.33 The data were
divided into 10 subsets of approximately equal size while maintaining the frequency of WRF within each of the subsets. Hence, each
subset contained approximately 16 cases of WRF. For each subset,
we generated a model for RD, leaving out one subset at a time.
The omitted subset was used to calculate the misclassiﬁcation
rate per model. We are aware of the problems of model building
using stepwise methods and these issues are discussed later.
The matched pairs odds ratio was used to assess changes in treatment from baseline to 6 months. The 95% CIs were calculated
according to McNemar’s test.34 Kaplan–Meier survival curves35 are
presented for mortality data using the guidance of Pocock et al.36
The log-rank test was used to assess the equality of survivor function across groups. The Cox regression model was used to calculate
hazard ratios with 95% CI. The Cox regression model is semiparametric in the sense that no assumption concerning event-free
survival times is necessary. The proportional hazards model is
based on the assumption that the effect of a risk factor, expressed
as a hazard ratio, is constant over time. The assumption of proportionality was tested for each variable, using the method of
Grambsch and Therneau.37 The output of this test is a P-value,
which for all our variables tested was not signiﬁcant. Hence, we
did not include time-dependent variables in our Cox models. We
did not validate these models using cross-validation because this
method is less well developed than the logistic model. A difﬁculty
is understanding how to deal with censoring.38 Instead, we produced
a subset of variables on univariate Cox analysis that were signiﬁcantly associated with follow-up time. We included all of these variables in the ﬁnal Cox model whether signiﬁcant or not. We further
adjusted the ﬁnal model for age, sex, and New York Heart
Association (NYHA) functional class. Variables used in the equations
to calculate renal function were not excluded in any analysis.
SPSS (version 11) and GLIM4 statistical computer packages were
used to analyse the data.39 An arbitrary level of 5% statistical signiﬁcance was used throughout (two-tailed). One of the statistical issues
to address is the problem of multiple testing when many variables
are present and the possible inﬂation of Type I error. However,
there is no consensus on what procedure to adopt to allow for
multiple comparisons.40 Hence, in order to account for the inﬂation
of experimentwise Type I error due to multiple testing, we have
followed the recommendations of Perneger41 and not adjusted for
this. There were two outcome measures: all-cause mortality and WRF.


Results
Study sample
A total of 2621 patients with suspected heart failure were
assessed. Of these, 905 patients were referred from general
outpatient clinics, 1087 patients were referred by primary
care physicians, and 629 patients were identiﬁed while in
hospital with suspected heart failure and subsequently
seen following stabilization and discharge. In 1406 patients,
the diagnosis of heart failure due to left ventricular systolic
dysfunction was conﬁrmed following clinical assessment and
investigations as described above and were entered into
the long-term management programme. At 6 months, 91
patients had died, 21 patients were lost to follow-up,
and 76 patients had missing data points. The remaining
1216 patients had complete data sets at both baseline
(Table 1) and 6-months follow-up and constituted our
study sample.
We compared the baseline data between the 190 patients
with missing 6 months data and our study sample of 1216
patients. Four variables showed signiﬁcant differences:
mean heart rate [71 (SD 15) vs. 76 (SD 17) b.p.m.], patients
with hypertension [96 (51%) vs. 502 (41%)], patients with
dilated cardiomyopathy [23 (12%) vs. 94 (8%)] and the
number of patients taking diuretics [20 (63%) vs. 893
(73%), P , 0.05 for all]. Other baseline data did not differ
signiﬁcantly.

Prevalence
The mean age at baseline was 71 years (range 22–95 years)
and 837 (69%) were male. One-ﬁfth (n ¼ 257) were aged
!80. Mean ejection fraction was 34% (SD 10) and CHF was
due to IHD in 798 (66%) patients. The mean values for SCr
and GFR were 122 mmol/L (SD 51) [1.4 mg/dL (SD 0.6)]

and 57 mL/min (SD 21), respectively. Figure 1 shows the distributions for the SCr and GFR values. The prevalence of RD
deﬁned as using an SCr of .130 mmol/L (1.5 mg/dL) and a
GFR of ,60 mL/min was 32 and 57%, respectively.

Contributing factors and associations with renal
function at baseline
Five hundred and forty-eight patients (45%) had a normal
SCr, 526 (43%) had a minor increase, and 142 (12%)
had a marked increase. GFR was normal (!90 mL/min)
in only 82 patients (7%), mildly reduced (60–89 mL/min) in
437 patients (36%), moderately reduced (30–59 ml/min)
in 577 patients (47%), and markedly reduced ( 29 ml/min)
in 120 patients (10%).
Patients with severely impaired renal function were
older, more often female and had lower left ventricular
ejection fractions, diastolic blood pressure, and haemoglobin levels than patients with normal or mildly impaired
renal function (Table 1). As the severity of renal impairment increased, so did the prevalence of IHD, hypertension,
vascular disease, and other common co-morbidities.
The proportion of patients taking diuretics, and the dose
administered, increased as renal function declined. The proportion of patients taking ACE-inhibitors or beta-blockers
however was not different between the groups. As renal
function worsened, the proportion of patients taking
aspirin, statins, and calcium channel blockers declined.
Independent predictors of a low GFR at baseline were
increasing age, low haemoglobin, poorer NYHA functional
class, presence of IHD, vascular disease and hypertension,
and the use of spironolactone and loop diuretics (data not
shown).

Changes in renal function assessed by SCr
During the 6-month follow-up, mean SCr rose by 4 mmol/L
(0.05 mg/dL) (95% CI ¼ 2–4). WRF, deﬁned as a rise in SCr
of .26.5 mmol/L (0.3 mg/dL), occurred in 161 (13.0%)
patients. One hundred and twenty-one (9.7%) patients
showed an improvement by this amount. Figure 2A shows
these changes in SCr as frequency histograms. Figure 3A
shows the number of patients in whom renal function worsened, improved, or remained the same over 6 months
period, stratiﬁed by the presence or absence of baseline
renal impairment, deﬁned by the SCr values mentioned
earlier. Table 2 indicates the risk factors for WRF. Factors
associated with WRF were a history of vascular disease,
low systolic and diastolic blood pressures, low ejection fraction, high baseline blood urea levels, and thiazide and diuretic use. The relationships with all other variables were not
statistically signiﬁcant. The model-building exercise produced a wide variety of models but with some commonalties
(Table 3). A total of 12 variables appeared in 10 different
predictor models for RD but no model was repeated more
than once. Misclassiﬁcation rates varied greatly (Table 4).
From these models, the presence of vascular disease, use
of thiazide diuretics, and blood urea levels were strongly
associated with WRF.

Changes in renal function assessed by the GFR
During the 6-month follow-up period, mean GFR fell by
2 mL/min (95% CI ¼ 1–3). Figure 2B shows these changes in GFR as frequency histograms.  Vascular disease is a composite of stroke, transient ischaemic attacks, peripheral vascular disease, renal artery stenosis, or abdominal aortic aneurysms.


Relationships to prognosis
There were 263 deaths at follow-up representing a crude
death rate of 21.6%. The median time to follow-up was
16.5 months (interquartile range 9.6–26.3 months).
Kaplan–Meier survival curves for baseline SCr and GFR,
along with the numbers at risk, are shown in Figure 4.
Patients with worse renal function at baseline had a
poorer prognosis (P , 0.001). The relationship between
death and renal disease was investigated by Cox regression
analysis from which hazard ratios and 95% CI were generated. Patients with WRF had a poorer prognosis,
although the severity of RD rather than its change appeared
the most important determinant of outcome. A total of nine
variables were signiﬁcantly associated with follow-up time
on univariate analysis. All these variables were included in
the ﬁnal Cox model (Table 6). GFR was eliminated from
the model by SCr. When considering the joint effects of
baseline SCr and WRF on death, a synergistic relationship
was noted (Figure 5). Recovery in renal function (a fall in
the SCr of .26.5 mmol/L (0.3 mg/dL)) was associated with
a better prognosis (hazard ratio 0.8, 95% CI 0.6–1.0)
adjusted for age, sex, and NYHA class).

Discussion
This study provides unique information on the prevalence
and natural history of RD in a large epidemiologically representative population of outpatients with relatively
stable CHF due to left ventricular systolic dysfunction. It
shows that RD is common, commonly deteriorates over a
relatively short period of time, is unlikely to recover substantially, and augurs a poor prognosis.

Prevalence
In patients with a recent hospitalization for worsening heart
failure, the prevalence of RD has been reported to be
between 24 and 75% depending on the deﬁnition used.14
One-third of our patients had evidence of renal impairment
using an SCr threshold of 130 mmol/L (1.5 mg/dL) but more
than half had a calculated GFR of ,60 mL/min. Among
patients in the SOLVD Prevention and Treatment trials, the
prevalence of RD deﬁned as a GFR of ,60 mL/min was 21
and 36%, respectively, but in these studies, patients with
SCr 220 mmol/L (2.5 mg/dL) and those aged .79 were
excluded.6 The absence of such exclusion criteria, combined
with higher rates of co-morbidity, probably accounts for the

greater prevalence of RD in our population and is similar to
the ﬁndings reported recently by others.

Incidence of WRF
The natural progression of RD in outpatients with CHF is
one of the deterioration. Although the incidence of deterioration is much less than in patients admitted with an
exacerbation of heart failure using the same deﬁnition for
WRF,13,15 the gross rate of 13% over 6 months is substantial.
Even if the rate of ‘recovery’ is subtracted, the net rate of
3% over 6 months is still of concern.

Causes of RD and reasons for WRF
Haemodynamic and renal factors
Patients with co-morbid vascular disease, higher levels of
baseline blood urea, and lower ejection fractions were at
greater risk of developing WRF. Two previous reports analysing WRF in hospitalized patients with CHF describe systemic
hypertension, diabetes, history of CHF, and high baseline SCr


Medications
RD could also be a side effect of treatments for heart
failure. Loop and thiazide diuretics and spironolactone
were all associated with WRF, although in an observational study such as this cause and effect cannot usually
be distinguished. There must have been a reason to
alter diuretic therapy and that will usually have been an
attempt to improve symptoms. Also, as GFR declines,
less diuretic will be ﬁltered and intra-tubular delivery
will decline with a loss of diuretic effect. Higher doses
may be required in the presence of RD to achieve the
same diuretic effect.
We showed no difference in the frequency or dose of ACEinhibitors or angiotensin receptor blocker use in patients with
varying degrees of RD, which contrasts with previous
reports.44,45 Although ACE-inhibitors may reduce renal perfusion pressure, efferent arteriolar tone, and GFR in patients
with heart failure in the short-term, there is evidence that
they retard long-term deterioration of renal function in
other clinical settings.46,47 The net long-term effect of ACEinhibition on renal function in most patients with heart failure appears fairly neutral. Similarly, beta-blockers did not
exert marked effects on the incidence of RD.
Statins have been reported to reduce the risk of WRF in
patients with renal artery disease.48 In our study, patients
with moderate or severe RD were less likely to be taking a
statin, suggesting that chronic use of these agents might
retard progression of atherosclerotic renal disease, although
other mechanisms of beneﬁt should not be discounted.
During 6 months of follow-up, we were unable to conﬁrm
a protective effect of statins on WRF but statins were associated with a markedly lower mortality. The hypothesis that
the observed association between better prognosis and
statin treatment is cause and effect is being tested in two
large randomized controlled trials.

The relationship between RD and survival seen in our cohort
of patients has been observed in several other multi-centre
studies of CHF and, more recently, in clinical practice.42 In
the SOLVD treatment trial,6 patients with CHF who had a
GFR ,60 mL/min were more likely to die, especially from
worsening CHF. Similar ﬁndings were reported by Mahon
et al.50 These studies show that even minor reductions in
GFR, which do not necessarily increase SCr above the
normal range, are associated with a worse outcome. The
seven-fold increase in the risk of death in the presence of
a markedly raised baseline SCr and WRF when compared
with a normal baseline SCr and no WRF observed in our
cohort implies a synergistic association between these two
variables (Figure 5). Interestingly, it did not appear that
GFR was a better predictor of prognosis than SCr and therefore it seems appropriate when using markers of RD to assess
prognosis to use the simplest available measure. In our
study, the severity of RD appeared more prognostically
important than the change.
The reasons for the increased mortality in patients with
RD and CHF are multi-factorial and complex. RD may limit
the use of life-saving interventions such as ACE-inhibitors,
angiotensin receptor blockers, and beta-blockers, although
this was not obvious in the current study. Patients with RD
have more peripheral vascular disease and may be at
higher risk of vascular events. RD may lead to diuretic computing resources mean that it is possible to explore
many models simultaneously so that the ‘one-ﬁt’ model is
no longer appropriate. This ﬁts in with the notion of
having a portfolio of plausible models.67 Finally, Copas68
stated that ‘a good predictor may include variables which
are not signiﬁcant, exclude others which are, and may
involve coefﬁcients which are systematically biased’, sentiments with which we agree. In conclusion, stepwise
methods are not designed to select ‘best’ models or to indicate their relative importance but rather designed to select
subsets from data sets ‘padded with extraneous variables,
for example, those that contain everything we could
measure’.69

study limitations

The deﬁnition of WRF we used has arisen by convention
rather than been justiﬁed scientiﬁcally.13–15 An increase in
SCr of as little as 17.7 mmol/L (0.2 mg/dL) is associated
with an adverse outcome.14 Other investigators have used
a rise in SCr above a threshold to deﬁne renal insufﬁciency
[e.g. SCr .221 mmol/L (.2.5 mg/dL) or a percentage
increase from baseline (e.g. .25% increase)].70,71 Each deﬁnition of WRF has its merits and problems. For instance, the
ﬁnal SCr may still be in the normal range even if there is a
substantial increase. This may not carry the same adverse
prognosis as a similar rise in SCr that results in an increased
ﬁnal value. Likewise the deﬁnition used for an improvement
in renal function is not evidence based. The study analysed
data at two deﬁned points during patient follow-up, but
does not take into account the factors in the intervening
periods that could effect the renal function such as hospitalizations with signiﬁcant haemorrhage, dehydration, or
exposure to intravenous contrast. We also do not have temporal information as to when the doses of diuretics were
changed in relationship to changes in renal function.
Finally, because of the inherent nature of the study, patients
who died or had incomplete data sets at follow-up were not
included in the analysis. This could have the potential to
introduce a selection bias.

Model selection procedures
In epidemiological studies, statistical models are often
determined by data-driven selection methods. Such
methods usually have only a heuristic basis and their
sampling properties are largely unknown. Forward selection
and backward elimination are two of the most widely used
(and abused) selection methods. Indeed, many computer
packages have such automated stepwise methods built
into their software. Statistical objections to automated
selection methods have long been known. For example,
results lead to standard errors that may be too low.61–63 If
important variables are omitted from the ﬁnal model, the
regression coefﬁcients are known to be biased.64 Finally,
the selection method affects the properties of the tests of
the ﬁnal model itself.65 Many ‘solutions’ to these objections
have been proposed with most focusing on resampling.
Perhaps the best known resampling methods are crossvalidation, the jack-knife, and bootstrapping. It is not our
aim here to discuss which of these resampling methods is
best but an excellent overview is given Sauerbrei.32
In the past, it may have been true that a single model was
typically ﬁtted to a given data set.66 However, modern day

Conclusion
RD is common in CHF and is associated with a poor prognosis,
which is only partly explained by its association with poorer
ventricular function. Renovascular disease, perhaps both of
extra- and intra-renal vessels, may be an important underrecognized risk factor for WRF in patients with heart
failure. Whether routine investigation for and treatment of
renal artery stenosis in this setting is beneﬁcial is uncertain,
but is being tested in a subset of patients with heart failure
in a randomized controlled trial (ASTRAL, Angioplasty and
Stent for Renal Artery Lesions).72
Conﬂict of interest: none declared.

More than 50 % of end-stage renal disease (ESRD) patients
treated by chronic hemodialysis die from cardiovascular diseases,
including congestive heart failure (CHF). The incidence of CHF is
rising in both general and ESRD population. However, the
mechanisms, which lead to the development of CHF in dialyzed
patients, differ considerably. First, there are several factors
leading to increase of the left ventricular afterload: volume
overload between dialyses, hypertension, increased arterial
stiffness, anemia, vascular access flow (arteriovenous fistula) and
sympathetic activation. Second, hypertension, left ventricular
hypertrophy, anemia and frequently present coronary artery
disease worsen myocardial oxygenation. The combination of
these factors explains the high incidence of CHF in dialyzed
patients and their roles are reviewed in this article.


Prevalence, mortality, morbidity
More than 50 % of end-stage renal disease
(ESRD) subjects treated by chronic hemodialysis die
from cardiovascular diseases (Collins 2003). Congestive

heart failure (CHF) is present in more than one-third of
new dialysis patients (Stack and Bloembergen 2001) with
an incidence of 71/1000 person-years. This figure is
substantially greater than the incidence of acute coronary
syndromes in ESRD patients (29/1000 person-years in
US Renal Data System (USRDS) Morbidity and
Mortality Study Wave 2) (Trespalacios et al. 2003). CHF
contributes significantly to mortality and morbidity and
also worsens the quality of life. For instance, the median
overall survival of ESRD patients with CHF is reported
to be 36 months compared with 62 months in patients
without CHF (Harnett et al. 1995). Fewer than 15 % of
dialysis patients are alive 3 years after hospitalization for
CHF (Trespalacios et al. 2003).
By definition, CHF is a state in which the heart
is unable to pump blood at a rate appropriate to the
requirements of the metabolizing tissues or can do so
only at an elevated filling pressure (Zipes et al. 2005).
CHF in ESRD patients differs from CHF states in
subjects with preserved renal function by several factors.
Interdialytic volume overload and vascular access flow
are specific only for ESRD. Therefore, hemodialysis also
contributes per se to the development of CHF. During
continuous worsening of chronic kidney disease,
nephrogenic hypertension develops. This is the source of
pressure overload, especially in patients with inadequate
hypertension control. Most important mechanisms of
CHF in ESRD patients treated by hemodialysis are
discussed below. We did not include the problems
associated with peritoneal dialysis nor kidney
transplantation to keep this review more transparent.


Increased left ventricular mass (hypertrophy)
(LVH) is the most frequent cardiac abnormality
diagnosed in patients starting hemodialysis (present in
about 80 %) (Foley et al. 1995, Herzog et al. 1998). LVH
is an independent and strong risk factor for
cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in both normal
population (Levy et al. 1990) and in ESRD patients
(Silberberg 1989). In the latter population, LVH is
principally due to an increased demand in the left
ventricular minute work resulting from volume/flow and
pressure overload (Meeus et al.1989). Two forms of the
left ventricular hypertrophy – eccentric and concentric –
could be present and are relatively equivalent in
prevalence in dialysis population. Eccentric hypertrophy
results from volume overload leading to cardiac myocyte
drop-out: there is myocyte to arteriolar capillary
mismatch. Concentric hypertrophy is typically the result
of hypertension and increased afterload and is
exacerbated by anemia, hyperparathyreoidism, and high
angiotensin II concentrations. In experimental renal
failure, LVH was associated with reduced capillary
density and subsequent interstitial fibrosis (Mall et al.
1990, Amann et al. 1990). The latter is probably a reason
of diastolic and later also systolic dysfunction of the left
ventricle present in LVH. While in general population
hypertension is the most frequent cause of the left
ventricle hypertrophy, in ESRD patients, the correlation
between left ventricle mass and blood pressure is weak.
Experimental and clinical studies have shown that
hypertrophy develops even in normotensive ESRD
subjects (London et al. 1987).
Schematically, factors contributing to the
development of CHF include those increasing preload
and decreasing the myocardial perfusion or oxygenation
of the left ventricle (Table 1). Left ventricular afterload is
increased by some and decreased by other mechanisms.

Mechanisms of CHF
Volume overload between dialyses
Most subjects with ESRD have insufficiently
low or even no diuresis, which leads to water retention.
Excessive water is removed during dialysis sessions by
ultrafiltration. Nevertheless, dialysis is usually performed
only 2-3 times per week and body water accumulates and
fluctuates between the dialysis sessions. This fluctuation
plays a role in the development of the left ventricular
hypertrophy, which in turn predisposes to CHF (London 2003a,b). The ultrafiltration rate is targeted to reach so
called dry weight of the patient. There are several
methods of dry weight calculation. To simplify, dry
weight is the minimal tolerated weight – without clinical
signs of dehydration. Inappropriate calculation of the dry
weight leads to chronic volume overload (Charra 2007).
Factors leading to the increase of preload and to the
worsening of myocardial oxygen supply are Interdialytic volume overload , Anemia , Vascular access flow , Inflammation , Coronary artery disease , Hypertension and LV hypertrophy


Overhydration between the dialyses contributes
to the pathogenesis of LVH in ESRD by its effects on
blood pressure control and also by induction of volume
overload (London 2003a,b). The internal dimensions of
the left ventricle, stroke volume, and end-diastolic
pressure are directly related to circulating blood volume
(Chaignon et al. 1981). Body fluid volume reduction
during dialysis sessions induces a decrease in left
ventricle diameter and cardiac output, and there is a direct
correlation between interdialytic body weight changes
and LV mass, as well as stroke volume (Harnett 1993).
LV mass correlates with the concentrations of atrial
natriuretic peptides, which are influenced by extracellular
fluid volume (Zoccalli et al. 2001). Regression of the left
ventricular dimensions and LVH can be achieved by
ultrafiltration and reduced salt intake in hemodialysis
patients (Ozkahya et al. 1998). Indeed, patients treated by
daily dialysis have lower and steadier levels of brain
natriuretic peptide (BNP), the marker of heart failure and
overhydration (Odar-Cederlof et al. 2006). A similar
LVH reduction was associated with better blood pressure
control, decrease in extracellular fluid volume, and with
lower volume fluctuation in patients on daily dialysis
(Fagugli et al. 2001).
Anemia
Anemia is a frequent condition even in milder
stages of chronic renal disease, mainly due to decreased
synthesis of erythropoietin. Non-hemodynamic
mechanisms of body adaptation to anemia include increased oxygen extraction in tissues, mediated by
increased 2,3-diphosphoglycerate levels. Mechanisms of
hemodynamic compensation of anemia are complex:
1) reduced afterload due to a decrease in systemic
vascular resistance, 2) increased preload due to an
increase in venous return, and 3) increased left ventricular
function attributed to increased sympathetic activity and
inotropic factors. Increased left ventricular performance
can result from an increased preload (Frank-Starling
mechanism) and from changes in inotropic state in
relation to high sympathetic activity or inotropic factors
(Muller et al. 1991). In chronic anemia, typical for
ESRD, long-lasting flow/volume overload and increased
cardiac work lead to progressive cardiac enlargement and
to the left ventricular hypertrophy (Parfrey et al. 1991).
The alterations in cardiac function are accompanied by
simultaneous remodeling of the large conduit arteries
(London et al. 1996). Indeed, in dialysis patients, anemia
is associated with LVH, left ventricular dilatation,
congestive heart failure, increased hospitalization rate,
and increased mortality (Foley et al. 1996a,b, Ma et al.
1999, Madore et al. 1997).
In patients on dialysis, treatment of anemia with
erythropoietin alters both the function and the structure of
the left ventricle. It decreases the stroke volume and heart
rate, and decreases the cardiac output and left ventricular
work (Fellner et al. 1993). Older studies showed
optimistic data of mortality risk decrease (Moecks 2000).
Recent studies compared the lower and higher target
hemoglobin values (10.5-11.5 g/dl and 13.0-13.5 g/dl,
respectively). They failed to show any benefit of higher
target hemoglobin value except for better quality of life
(Drueke et al. 2006, Singh et al. 2006). In a metaanalysis, patients in the higher target value group had
higher mortality (Phrammintikul et al. 2007). It was

speculatively explained by increased rate of thromboses,
including infarctions as a result of both higher hematocrit,
and by some direct effects of erythropoietin favoring
inflammatory states.


Factors influencing left ventricle afterload are Anemia , Ultrafiltration , Endothelial dysfunction , ypertension , Increased arterial stiffness , volume overload, Sympathetic activation and Vascular access.


Hypertension and arterial wall stiffness
Chronic kidney disease could be both the reason
and the result of hypertension. This is probably a source
of the very high hypertension prevalence in ESRD
subjects. For example, in our previous study, more than
70 % of 258 subjects coming for vascular access
examination into our department from the whole country
suffered from hypertension (Malík et al. 2007). In nonESRD patients, several studies have repeatedly confirmed
that the treatment of high blood pressure decreases both
cardiac and particular cerebrovascular events in patients
with diabetes (Schrier et al. 2002) as well as in those
without diabetes (Hansson et al. 1999). Similarly,
decreasing blood pressure has been shown to prevent
progression of renal disease (Bakris et al. 2000). A new
light was brought by a series of subsequent studies, which
were meta-analyzed by the project “INDIANA” (Boutitie
et al. 2002). It has been shown that lowering diastolic
blood pressure is protective until a certain level and then
the risk of all-cause mortality rises again: J-shaped curve.
The authors have revealed a J-point at a diastolic blood
pressure of 84 mmHg. There are several possible
explanations of this phenomenon and two of them seem
to be particularly important. First, subjects with low
blood pressure suffer probably from more severe cardiac
disease (heart failure and/or coronary artery disease).
Second, the decrease of the diastolic blood pressure leads
to the increase of pulse pressure and the increment in
pulse pressure may be responsible for the “J”-like relation
(Berl and Henrich 2006).

The ill effects of hypertension are usually
attributed to the reduction in the internal diameter of
arterioles, resulting in a peripheral resistance increase.
Blood pressure is the easiest measurable index of
opposition to left ventricular ejection (afterload). In fact,
the appropriate term to define the arterial factors
opposing LV ejection is the aortic impedance, which
depends on: 1) the peripheral resistance, 2) the
viscoelastic properties of the aorta and central arteries,
and 3) the inertial forces represented by the mass of the
blood in the aorta and left ventricle (Nichols and
O´Rourke 2005). Peripheral resistance, as a determinant
of mean blood pressure, sets the general level at which
the pressure wave will fluctuate. The amplitude of this
fluctuation (pulse pressure) is influenced by the
viscoelastic properties of the aorta and large arteries and
by the characteristics of the left ventricular ejection
(stroke volume and ejection velocity). The viscoelastic
properties of the aorta can be described in terms of
compliance, distensibility and stiffness (Meeus et al.
2000). Stiffening of arterial walls can increase the
afterload independently of peripheral resistance.
Clinically, high aortic stiffness is suspected in patients
with high pulse pressure. The latter can occur in case of
diastolic pressure decrease, systolic pressure increase, or
both. Arterial stiffening leads to faster pulse wave
velocity, which, after the reflections at the level of the
peripheral arteries, returns earlier to the aorta, amplifies
aortic and even ventricular pressures during systole
(aortic valve is still open) and reduces aortic pressure
during diastole (Safar et al.1990). Vitious circle continues
by further stiffening of arteries. Arterial stiffening is also
a result of metabolic disturbances (see below).
Vascular pathology, coronary artery disease
Several vascular pathologies play a role in
patients suffering from ESRD. These include
1) atherosclerosis, 2) arteriosclerosis, and 3) vascular
calcifications and remodeling.
Atherosclerosis develops rapidly in ESRD
patients. Uremia produces specific atherogenic factors,
e.g. secondary form of complex dyslipidemia (Madore
2003), calcium-phosphate metabolism alterations (Floege
and Ketteler 2004), malnutrition, and activation of
inflammation (Madore 2003). These factors are additive
to the risk factors present in patients with normal renal
function, such as age, hypertension, smoking, diabetes,
male gender and insulin resistance (Brunner et al. 2005).
Although atherosclerosis was considered the only cause of macrovascular disease, many vascular complications
arise in ESRD patients in the absence of clinically
significant atherosclerotic disease.
Arteriosclerosis refers to the hardening or
stiffening of arteries (or arterioles). It is typically
associated with aging and involves the entire arterial tree,
although it principally affects the elastic arteries. Unlike
atherosclerosis, arteriosclerosis involves both intimal and
medial thickening. Arteriosclerosis is associated with
vascular hypertrophy characterized by increased wall
thickness, lumen enlargement, and increased length of
arteries, referred together as remodeling (London
2003a,b).
Histologically, arteries from uremic patients
have been reported to have fibrous or fibroelastic intimal
thickening; calcification of the internal elastic lamella,
medial ground substance and medial elastic fibers; and
disruption and reduplication of the internal elastic lamella
(Ibels et al. 1979). These indicate the predominance of
arterial calcification in uremia and provide histological
evidence for the loss of elasticity in ESRD. Excessive
calcification also affects the cardiac valves.
Tunica media calcification is a common feature
in ESRD subjects. Diabetes mellitus is the strongest risk
factor, but uremia per se has also been shown to
contribute. It is due to disturbed calcium/phosphate
metabolism – abnormal phosphate homeostasis in the
setting of ESRD markedly alters the severity,
progression, and extent of vascular calcifications
(Vattikuti et al. 2004). Vitamin D deficiency, as a result
of kidney failure, affects cardiac contractility, vascular
tone, cardiac collagen content and cardiac tissue
maturation (Achinger and Ayus 2005). Reduced levels of
vitamin D, hyperphosphatemia and a tendency towards
hypocalcemia lead to the increased production of
parathormone and the secondary hyperparathyreoidism
develops (DeFrancisco 2004). Clinically, so-called
calcium/phosphate product is used as a measure of
calcium/phosphate metabolism. Detailed description of
the mechanisms of vascular calcifications is behind the
scope of this review. Higher concentrations of
aldosterone, endothelin, angiotensin II or asymetric
dimethylarginine (ADMA, which is an endogenous
inhibitor of nitric oxide synthase) also contribute to
higher arterial stiffness.
Valvular disease
Valvular calcifications are typical for ESRD
patients. They mostly occur in mitral and aortic valve and are markers of poorer prognosis. Wang et al. (2003)
found that valvular calcification is an important predictor
of all-cause and cardiovascular mortality in peritoneal
dialysis patients. They hypothesized, that the poor
outcome could be explained by the fact that these patients
have the most severe and advanced atherosclerosis. On
the contrary, the increased mortality was not explained by
the valvular obstruction. Despite the findings of Wang et
al., the incidence of aortic valve stenosis increases during
last two decades (Michel 1998). It is explained by
increasing age of hemodialyzed population, but the
disturbances of calcium/phosphate metabolism probably
also play a role together with the increased shear of aortic
valve due to hyperkinetic circulation. In a general
population, aortic stenosis leads to heart failure in its late
stage. In ESRD patients, aortic stenosis could contribute
to heart failure symptoms earlier.
Mitral valve calcifications lead only rarely to the
development of significant regurgitation/stenosis.
Valvular regurgitation may be also a result of infective
endocarditis. It is more common in patients dialyzed via
permanent catheter (Kamalakannan et al. 2007).
Vascular access
Surgically created vascular access, either
“native” (direct connection of patient´s artery and vein)
or with the use of artificial graft, serves for repeated
entries into the blood stream during hemodialyses.
Adequate flow volume is needed for the hemodialysis
procedure and also for longer patency of the access.
Generally, forearm accesses have flow 400-800 ml/min,
brachial accesses 800-1500 ml/min. Such flow is due to a
sudden fall of peripheral vascular resistance just after the
access creation together with further maturation of both
the feeding artery and outflow vein. This systemic
vascular resistance decrease leads to subsequent volume
overload and – at least temporarily – to increased cardiac
output and left ventricle ejection fraction (Ori et al.
1996). Bos et al. (1999) studied the effects of vascular
access on cardiac oxygen supply and demand using
pressure wave analysis. They concluded that access has
small effect on left ventricular oxygen demand, but
decreases cardiac oxygen supply considerably.
Case reports of hyperkinetic heart failure as a
result of high flow access have been published (Jin et al.
2006). More commonly, access flow contributes to the
development of already present congestive heart failure
either clinically silent or overt. Such opinion is supported
by the following studies of access creation impact on heart failure parameters. Ori et al. (1996) documented an
increase of cardiac output, ejection fraction, cardiac index
and of atrial natriuretic peptide and a decrease of plasma
renin activity in a small study (10 subjects). Similar
findings were observed two weeks after access creation
(Iwashima et al. 2002), and left ventricle diastolic
function worsened after access creation together with the
increase of ANP and BNP. We observed a significant
increase of BNP levels six weeks after the construction of
vascular access with “normal” flow (709±311 ml/min)
(unpublished data). Unfortunately, these studies do not
demonstrate the long-term effect of access flow on heart
failure.
An opposite approach was used by Chemla et al.
(2007) they monitored the effect of surgical access flow
reduction on cardiac output in a group of high access
flow patients (3135±692 ml/min). Access age (mean ±
SD) at inclusion was 30±17 months and only accesses
with flow volume exceeding 1600 ml/min were included.
Cardiac output decreased significantly after the surgery
together with the access flow. Similar topic (but with the
use of a different flow-reducing surgical technique) was
studied in a case reported by Murray et al. (2004). The
most interesting finding in this study was that in highoutput states (induced by high flow accesses), the
necessary increase in cardiac output to sustain the high
access flows must be numerically greater than the actual
access flow. This phenomenon was also apparent in the
study by Chemla et al. (2007) where access flow
reduction of about 2 l/min led to cardiac output decrease
by more than 3 l/min. We could hypothesize that this
numerical imbalance mirrors excessive increase of
preload or, in other words, a sign of heart failure.
Other mechanisms
Hemodialysis is associated with repetitive
hemodynamic instability and subsequent myocardial
ischemia, which may be due to coronary microvascular
dysfunction. This process may also be important for the
development of heart failure in hemodialysis patients
(McIntare et al. 2008).
Pericardial effusions are common in ESRD
patients, but only rarely significant if chronic dialysis
therapy has been established. Various arrhythmias could
be present as a result of ionic imbalance. They could
contribute to the CHF by impaired left ventricular filling.
Sleep apnea is common in ESRD patients (Kimmel et al.
1989) and leads to nocturnal hypoxemia. Malnutrition is
also common and is associated with higher risk of CHF



(Foley et al. 1996b). It could be estimated by the level of
serum albumin.
Kidney transplantation leads (sometimes) to the
regression of the left ventricular hypertrophy and systolic
dysfunction (Parfrey et al. 1995). This phenomenon was
explained by the decrease of “uremic toxin” levels and
the term “uremic cardiomyopathy” is sometimes used to
describe the complex non-coronary left ventricular
changes in ESRD patients (Gross and Ritz 2008).
However, patients treated by hemodialysis do not have
real clinical signs of uremia and many so called “uremic
toxins“ were already discovered – aldosterone,
endothelin, angiotensin II, ADMA, parathormone,
cytokines, advanced glycation end-products, advanced
oxidation protein products, etc. (for review see also
Cibulka and Racek 2007).

ventricle diameter and mass (Paleček et al. 2008), by
levels of natriuretic peptides etc. It is generally accepted
that regular examinations should be performed at least
24 h after last hemodialysis, some authors examine just
before the next dialysis.

Research and diagnostic limitations

Conflict of Interest

Conclusions
Congestive heart failure is common in ESRD
patients and is associated with substantial morbidity and
mortality. It is a result of a complex of mechanisms, some
of them occurring solely in ESRD patients.
Unfortunately, chronic hemodialysis therapy cannot fully
replace functioning kidneys. Detailed understanding of
the mechanisms leading to CHF could improve the
outcome of ESRD.

Summary Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is common and the estimated prevalence is about
9—13% in the general adult population. CKD is deﬁned by the presence of kidney damage or
decreased glomerular ﬁltration rate. Individuals with CKD have a far greater likelihood of cardiovascular death than progression to end-stage renal disease. Heart failure (HF) is a complex
clinical syndrome that can result from any structural or functional cardiac disorder and the
prevalence is reported to be 2—3% in the general population. The prognosis of HF patients is
still poor despite recent advances in HF treatment. Both diseases are major and growing public
health problems because aging of the population contributes to the increasing incidence of
those diseases. More than 40% of HF patients have CKD and the close relationship between CKD
and HF worsens their prognoses. All physicians must evaluate kidney function using estimated
glomerular ﬁltration rate calculated by the new Japanese equation in patients with HF. Accurate evaluation of pathophysiology between the two diseases and appropriate intervention are
necessary to improve the prognosis of patients with the diseases.



Introduction
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is an extensive public health
problem which should be recognized properly by every
healthcare provider. The US National Kidney Foundation Kidney Disease Outcome Quality Initiative proposed the concept
of CKD and established the deﬁnition and classiﬁcation in
2002.
Studies from the USA, Europe, Australia, and Asia showed
that the prevalence of CKD is about 9—13% in the general
population [2—5]. The incidence and prevalence of patients
with CKD including end-stage renal disease (ESRD) have doubled in the past 10 years in the USA [6]. Many patients
with CKD die from cardiovascular disease (CVD) and patients
who need renal replacement therapy are fewer, except in
those with ESRD [7]. CKD is more prevalent in patients with
CVD or with CVD-related risk factors, such as hypertension,
diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, and metabolic syndrome.
Furthermore, CKD is a signiﬁcant aggravating factor in
patients with these conditions and is also an important prognostic risk for them [8].
Heart failure (HF) is also a serious and expanding public
health matter and is one of the leading causes of mortality in
most developed countries. More than 5 million patients have
HF and over 550,000 patients are newly diagnosed with HF
every year in the USA [9]. The European Society of Cardiology reports that there are at least 15 million patients with HF
in 51 European countries, which have a total population of
more than 900 million [10]. The prevalence of HF is approximately 2—3% and rises sharply in elderly populations, and
it has been increasing because of the progressive aging of
the population and the decreased mortality of patients who
survived the ﬁrst coronary event [11]. The total estimated
costs for managing HF were reported to be 27.9 billion dollars in the USA in 2005, and 905 million pounds in the UK
in 2000 [11,12]. Approximately 50% of HF patients die at 4
years and 40% of admitted patients with HF are dead or readmitted within 1 year despite the recent improved treatment
for HF [10].
Patients with HF usually have much co-morbidity such
as arterial hypertension, diabetes mellitus, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, anemia, cachexia, gout, and renal
insufﬁciency, and such co-morbidity aggravates the condition of HF. Renal dysfunction is especially common in HF
patients, and anemia, hyperkalemia, low serum albumin,
and uses of renin-angiotensin-system (RAS) inhibitors, aldosterone antagonists, and diuretics are associated with such
disorder [10]. The prevalence of renal impairment increases
with age, HF severity, a history of hypertension, or diabetes.
Such close interaction between kidney and heart has
been called ‘‘cardiorenal syndrome (CRS)’’ and this connection is observed to be the most strong in patients with
HF. It seems to be mediated by not only the decreased cardiac output but also by the effects of the activated RAS, the
imbalance between nitric oxide and reactive oxygen species,
inﬂammation, anemia, and the increased sympathetic nervous activity.
This brief review describes the close relationship and
pathophysiology between CKD and HF, and summarizes
treatment strategies in HF patients with CKD.

Criteria
1. Kidney damage for ≥3 months, as deﬁned by structural
or functional abnormalities of the kidney, with or without
decreased GFR, manifest by either:
Pathological abnormalities; or
Markers of kidney damage, including abnormalities in the
composition of the blood or urine, or abnormalities in
imaging tests
2. GFR < 60 ml/min/1.73 m2 for ≥3 months, with or without
kidney damage
GFR, glomerular ﬁltration rate.


Deﬁnitions of CKD and HF: progressive disorders
The diagnosis of CKD is easily given by the existence of kidney damage or decreased glomerular ﬁltration rate (GFR) for
three months or more. GFR is estimated using the formula
including serum creatinine level, age, sex, and ethnicity
irrespective of cause of the disease. The deﬁnition and classiﬁcation stages of CKD are shown in Tables 1 and 2 [1]. CKD
is considered to be a disease that progresses from mild to severe condition as shown in Fig. 1, which is the conceptual
model of the course of CKD.
HF is a complex clinical syndrome that can be caused
by any structural or functional cardiac disorder that impairs
the pump function of the heart [11]. There have been many
deﬁnitions of HF proposed to date [13]. The common and
most important feature of HF syndrome includes symptoms,
signs, and objective evidence of a structural or functional
abnormality. It must be emphasized that HF is
not equal to left ventricular dysfunction and HF is characterized by speciﬁc symptoms in the past medical course
and signs revealed by the physical examination. The Writing
Committee of the AHA/ACC Heart Failure Guidelines developed a new stage classiﬁcation of HF in 2001, which includes
4 stages presenting the development and progression of
the HF syndrome. Stage A denotes patients with
CVD risks such as hypertension, diabetes mellitus, metabolic
syndrome, etc. and without any geometric or functional disorder in the left ventricle. In contrast, patients who are
asymptomatic but show left ventricular hypertrophy and/or
left ventricular dysfunction are indicated as Stage B. When
patients have symptoms of HF caused by underlying structural heart disease in the current or past medical status,
those are considered to reach Stage C. Finally Stage D speciﬁed patients with refractory HF who may need mechanical
circulatory support or heart transplantation [11].
Both classiﬁcations of CKD and HF have the same characteristics which clearly show the progressive manner of
diseases and these classiﬁcations can provide a reliable and
objective tool to identify patients on the way of developing the diseases (Fig. 1). Furthermore, they can indicate
the recommendation for treatments which are considered
to be appropriate at each stage of illness and are expected
to prevent advancement from one stage to the next.
Patients in the clinical intersection between CKD and HF
are at a high risk for poor outcomes. Inter-relationships of
CKD and HF include common characteristics, such as common risk factors, bidirectional effects of one disease process
on the progression of the other, adverse effects on one disease process when investigating the other, and treatment
biases potentially inﬂuenced by both diseases. Those clinical and pathophysiological links will be more expanded as
the stage progresses and will aggravate the severity of the
diseases more seriously (Fig. 1).



Deﬁnition of heart failure [10].

Heart failure is a clinical syndrome in which patients have
the following features:
Symptoms typical of heart failure
(breathlessness at rest or on exercise, fatigue, tiredness,
ankle swelling)
and
Signs typical of heart failure
(tachycardia, tachypnoea, pulmonary rales, pleural
effusion, raised jugular venous pressure, peripheral
edema, hepatomegaly)
and
Objective evidence of a structural or functional
abnormality of the heart at rest
(cardiomegaly, third heart sound, cardiac murmurs,
abnormality on the echocardiogram, raised natriuretic
peptide concentration)



HF in patients with CKD
The overlap between CKD and other chronic diseases, most
notably diabetes, hypertension, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and CVD is common. The annual data report
of the United States Renal Data System (USRDS) in 2009
reported that the prevalence of CVD reached 63% in CKD
patients compared to 5.8% of those without CKD, and it
graded the association with both CKD severity and age [6].
While CKD is a risk multiplier for the development of CVD,
the largest hazard occurs for HF. Compared with patients
without CKD, the relative risk for the development of HF
was 1.45 and 1.68 in patients with CKD of stage 1—2 and
3—5, respectively, when evaluating Medicare patients age
66 and older [6]. The event rate of HF diagnosis in those
patients was the highest among all CVD and it was 56 events
per 1000 patient years for patients without CKD and 176 for
those with CKD of stage 3—5. Age-adjusted survival of CKD
patients with HF was poor; one-year mortality of patients
with CKD of stage 3—5 was nearly 25% although that of those
without CKD was 17% [6].


Unadjusted all-cause mortality evaluating Medicare
patients age 66 and older showed the declining trend in
patients with CKD during the past 10 years. However, relative risk of mortality was almost 3 times higher when CVD
accompanied CKD [6]. Approximately 50% of CKD patients
died of complications of CVD before they reached ESRD [14].
Keith et al. revealed that death was more common than progression to ESRD by evaluating more than 28,000 patients
with CKD from a health maintenance organization [7]. Only
about 20% of patients with stage 4 CKD had progressed to
dialysis, whereas 46% had died of cardiovascular complications.
CVD accounted for 43.7% of the all-causes of death in
dialysis patients in the USRDS database in 2005—2007 [6].
The percentage of HF as a cause of mortality was 5.3%,
however event rates for congestive HF in dialysis patients
reached 270 per 1000 patient years [6]. A report from the
HEMO study indicated that HF prevalence in ESRD patients
is about 40% [15].
The prevalence and incidence of HF, and the percentage
of mortality due to HF in patients with mild to moderate
CKD is not well described, because such patients have a
broad spectrum of characteristics including CKD stage, age,
and cardiovascular risks. Kottgen et al. studied the role of
impaired kidney function as a risk factor for incident HF
evaluating 14,857 middle-aged individuals without HF who
were enrolled in The Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities
Study [16]. Crude HF incidences were 5.7, 5.9, and 17.7 per
1000 person-years in those with estimated GFR ≥ 90, 60—89,
and <60 ml/min/1.73 m2 , respectively, and a greater decline
in kidney function during the follow-up period occurred in
individuals concomitant with HF hospitalization/death compared to those who did not develop HF.



Proposed mechanism in cardiorenal interaction.

Common factors for heart and kidney
Traditional cardiovascular risk factors
Smoking
Obesity
Hypertension
Diabetes
Dyspilidemia
Other risk factors
Malnutrition
Genetic risk factors
Humorally mediated factors
Elevated sympathetic nervous system
Elevated renin-angiotensin system
Other common factors
Inflammation
Endothelial dysfunction
Immune mediated damage
Oxidative stress
Coagulation imbalance
Treatment related factors
Undertreatment
Toxic agents
Organ-specific factors
Hemodynamics mediated factors
Decreased cardiac output (heart)
Renal hypoperfusion (heart)
Elevated venous pressure (heart)
Sodium and water retention (kidney)
Hypertension (kidney)

CKD in patients with HF

Other specific factors
Brain natriuretic peptide (heart)
Anemia (kidney)
Uremic solute retention (kidney)
Calcium and phosphate abnormality (kidney)
Electrolyte, acid-base imbalances (kidney)


CKD is common in patients with HF. Table 4 shows the major
publications including our report describing the prognosis
and characteristics of chronic HF patients with CKD that
were published after 2000 [17—25]. CKD was present in
35—70% of HF patients evaluated in cohort studies or subanalyses of randomized controlled trials. Furthermore, the
comorbidity of CKD was associated with increased hospitalization due to worsening HF and all-cause/cardiovascular
deaths. The hazard ratio for all-cause mortality in HF
patients with moderate to severe CKD was about 1.3—2.9
compared to those without CKD (Table 4). The prognostic
impact of CKD was observed in a broad spectrum of HF
patients [22], however Ahmed et al. reported accompanying
CKD was more strongly associated with mortality in patients
with preserved ejection fraction than in those with reduced
ejection fraction [26].
One of the major mechanisms of worsening renal
function in patients with HF is considered to be longterm reduced renal perfusion. However, estimated GFR
in HF patients with preserved ejection fraction was similar compared with that in those with reduced ejection
fraction [27] and the ESCAPE trial revealed that renal
congestion might be a more important factor for renal
impairment compared to increased pulmonary artery pressure [28]. Other contributing factors of hypoperfusion are the increased vasoconstrictive mediators (epinephrine,
angiotensin, endothelin) and pharmacotherapy-related
effects including diuresis-associated hypovolemia, RAS
inhibitors, and drug-induced hypotension [29]. Other possible mechanisms of kidney—heart interaction are shown in
Table 5.




Acute kidney injury in patients with acute
heart failure
Acute heart failure (AHF) is deﬁned as a rapid onset
or change in the signs and symptoms of HF, which may
be either new HF or worsening of pre-existing chronic
HF. Although AHF is usually characterized by pulmonary
congestion, acutely reduced cardiac output and tissue
hypoperfusion are also important hemodynamic aspects,
which sometimes cause multiorgan failure. A rapid worsening of cardiac function also leads to acute kidney injury



Proposed deﬁnitions of cardiorenal syndrome [34].

CRS type 1 (acute CRS)
Abrupt worsening of cardiac function (e.g. acute
cardiogenic shock or decompensated congestive heart
failure) leading to acute kidney injury
CRS type II (chronic CRS)
Chronic abnormalities in cardiac function (e.g. chronic
congestive heart failure) causing progressive and
permanent chronic kidney disease
CRS type III (acute renocardiac syndrome)
Abrupt worsening of renal function (e.g. acute kidney
ischemia or glomerulonephritis) causing acute cardiac
disorder (e.g. heart failure, arrhythmia, ischemia)
CRS type IV (chronic renocardiac syndrome)
Chronic kidney disease (e.g. chronic glomerular disease)
contributing to decreased cardiac function, cardiac
hypertrophy and/or increased risk of adverse
cardiovascular events
CRS type V (secondary CRS)
Systemic condition (e.g. diabetes mellitus, sepsis)
causing both cardiac and renal dysfunction
CRS, cardiorenal syndrome.

(AKI) and pre-morbid chronic renal dysfunction has been
reported as a common precursor for AKI in HF patients
[30,31]. Worsening renal function, deﬁned as a rise in serum
creatinine level >0.3 mg/dl, during hospitalization for HF
is observed in 20—30% of HF patients [29]. Any change in
serum creatinine has been reported to be associated with
longer hospital stay, increased costs, and increased shortterm/long-term mortality [29]. Lower estimated GFR on
HF admission was also an independent predictor for longterm mortality in AHF patients [32]. The mechanisms of the
relationship are multiple and complex including persistent
vasoconstriction, high renal venous pressure, elevated intraabdominal pressure, adenosine and tubuloglomerular feedback, and medicine perturbing intrarenal hemodynamics
(Table 5) [29,33].

Classiﬁcation of cardiorenal syndrome
The bidirectional natures of heart and kidney interaction represent the pathophysiological basis for a clinical
entity that has been called cardiorenal syndrome (CRS)
(Fig. 1). Ronco et al. proposed the new classiﬁcation of
CRS to help physicians characterize groups of patients,
to provide the rationale for speciﬁc management strategies, and to allow the design of future clinical trials
[34]. They deﬁned CRS as a pathophysiologic disorder of
the heart and kidneys whereby acute or chronic dysfunction of 1 organ may induce acute or chronic dysfunction
of the other, and divided CRS into 5 different subtypes
(Table 6). The proposed mechanism of kidney—heart interaction is also shown in Table 5. The beneﬁt and validity
of using this classiﬁcation should be conﬁrmed in future
studies.



Anemia in patients with CKD and/or HF
Anemia develops relatively early in the disease course of
CKD and worsens with CKD severity. McClellan et al. reported
that anemia was present in 47.7% in 5222 enrolled patients
with CKD [35] and the prevalence of anemia was strongly
associated with decreased GFR. The major mechanisms of
the development of anemia are decreased erythropoietin
production and increased erythropoietin resistance, and
other causes include decreased red blood cell life span due
to uremic toxins, chronic blood loss caused by platelet dysfunction, nutritional deﬁciencies [36], iron deﬁciency, and
elevated inﬂammatory cytokines [37] that may cause bone
marrow suppression.
Anemia also frequently occurred in HF patients, with
reports ranging widely from 9.0% to 79.1% [38,39], but the
majority of studies described more than 20% [40]. Previous reports suggested that decreased hemoglobin level
was associated with increased rates of death and HFrelated admission [23]. Anemia observed in HF patients
mainly is attributed to kidney-related factors described
above, and is also related with bone marrow suppression
by frequent angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor
use in HF patients [41]. Because CKD and anemia frequently co-exist and worsen the prognosis in patients
with HF, CRS is also named as ‘‘cardio-renal-anemia
syndrome[40].
Whether the correction of anemia using erythropoiesisstimulating agents is beneﬁcial or not in patients with CKD
or HF is still controversial. Previous trials have reported
that the complete normalization of hemoglobin levels in CKD
patients did increase adverse outcomes, although it might
improve cardiac function [42]. The CHOIR study revealed the
surprisingly higher rates of adverse events in CKD patients
targeted for the high hemoglobin level (13.5 g/dl) compared
with those in the low hemoglobin group (11.3 g/dl) [43].
The CREATE and the TREAT studies also showed that the
complete correction of hemoglobin level did not demonstrate any improvement in cardiovascular events [44,45].
Meanwhile, some previous studies evaluating patients with
HF showed a beneﬁcial impact of anemia correction on HF
symptoms, left ventricular ejection fraction, and quality
of life [46,47]. However, in a recent trial in HF patients
(STAMINA-HeFT), darbepoetin alfa treatment did not significantly improve exercise duration, NYHA functional class,
or even health-related quality of life [48]. A large-scale,
double-blind, randomized morbidity and mortality trial
(RED-HF) is currently ongoing and it may demonstrate the
impact of anemia correction on mortality in those patients
[49].

Treatments of CKD patients with HF and of HF
patients with CKD
A complete description or details of treatment in patients
with CKD or HF are beyond the scope of this article, which
may appear in the authoritative clinical practice guidelines
for the treatment of CKD or HF [1,10,11]. The following
part highlights the issue regarding the treatment using RAS
inhibitors, which is the most commonly recommended therapy in patients with HF or CKD.


Reduction of proteinuria or albuminuria by treatment
is associated with the slowing of the progression of CKD
and is associated with reducing the cardiovascular events
[50—52]. Major clinical practice guidelines recommended
RAS inhibitors as the ﬁrst-line therapy for patients with proteinuric nephropathy [53—55]. However, several researchers
indicated that RAS blockade was not effective in patients
with early-stage CKD [56,57]. Furthermore, O’Hare et al.
estimated that 40.6% of the US population older than 70
years had stage 3 or 4 CKD, most of whom were diagnosed only by the decreased estimated GFR with lower
urinary protein excretion. They noted that such a population was poorly represented in randomized controlled trials
of CKD progression [58] and thus, whether there is a beneﬁt of RAS inhibitors in such elderly CKD patients is still
unknown.
Many studies have shown that the use of ACE inhibitors
increased survival in HF patients with reduced left ventricular function [59—61]. Angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARB)
provide comparable beneﬁcial effect on cardiovascular outcomes in those patients [62,63]. Several researchers have
shown that the beneﬁcial effect of RAS inhibition on HF and
CKD seems to be independent to lowering blood pressure
(BP) [64,65].
Whether the interventions aimed at lowering BP by way of
RAS inhibition and lowering protein excretion are beneﬁcial
simultaneously to both cardiovascular and renal outcome is
still controversial. The IDNT trial revealed that the relative
risk for reaching a renal end point progressively decreased
with the lowering in achieved systolic BP using irbesartan,
and the group below 120 mmHg did not show the increased
risk [64]. However, the risk for both all-cause mortality and
cardiovascular mortality rose in patients who achieved less
than 120 mmHg of systolic BP by a relative risk of 3.05 and
4.06, respectively, and the decrements of diastolic BP were
signiﬁcantly associated with the increased rate of myocardial infarction [65]. Meanwhile, the RENAAL trial showed
that patients with more than 30% reduction in urine protein excretion were associated with a signiﬁcantly reduced
risk for renal outcome compared with those without such a
reduction. Furthermore, the reduction in proteinuria was
also associated with reduced cardiovascular event rates
[51].

Medical recommendations in treating HF
patients with renal impairment
Because HF patients with CKD have been not adequately
represented in randomized controlled trials of HF, most
treatments in such patients are not usually prescribed in
an evidence-based manner. The following recommendations
must be validated in future studies [10,11].
1. General principles
(1) Evaluate the CKD stage using estimated GFR and
urine albumin:creatinine ratio.
(2) Check etiology of CKD.
(3) Control BP appropriately using anti-hypertensive
medicines including RAS-inhibitors and/or betablockers (<130/80 mmHg).

N. Shiba, H. Shimokawa
(4) Appropriate management of other traditional cardiovascular risks including diabetes, dyslipidemia,
smoking, etc. is necessary.
(5) Check all CKD-related risks including anemia, serum
electrolyte abnormality, serum albumin level, renotoxic agents, etc.
(6) When using ACE inhibitors/ARB, contraindications in
patients must be checked thoroughly and consider
reducing dose in patients with moderate-severe CKD.
(7) Aldosterone antagonists should be used with caution
as they may cause signiﬁcant hyperkalemia.
(8) Renal dysfunction is usually associated with impaired
clearance of HF medicines. The start or maintenance
doses should be reduced and plasma levels must be
monitored frequently to avoid toxicity, if possible.
(9) HF patients with CKD often have excessive salt and
water retention, which needs more intensive diuretic
treatment. In patients with severe CKD, loop diuretics are more effective than thiazide diuretics.
2. AHF Patients with AKI (CRS Type 1)
(1) Evaluate status of cardiac output and renal congestion.
(2) A gradual diuresis is recommended and extracorporeal ultraﬁltration may be considered in case of
severely decreased diuretic responsiveness [66].
(3) Close monitoring of renal function and hyperkalemia
is necessary especially when RAS inhibitors are used
[67].
(4) The administration of beta-blockers is not recommended until the patient has stabilized physiologically [68].
(5) The radiocontrast agent should be used in the careful
consideration for nephropathy and needs appropriate prophylaxis [69].
3. Chronic HF Patients with CKD (CRS Type 2)
(1) Attention needs to be paid to reducing risk factors
and optimizing medication.
(2) Diuresis-associated hypovolemia, RAS inhibitors, and
drug-induced hypotension are contributing factors
for renal impairment [29].
(3) In patients with diabetic nephropathy and overt proteinuria, the risk for congestive HF may increase
when systolic BP is decreased to less than 120 mmHg
[65].
(4) Peritoneal dialysis may be a therapeutic option for
refractory HF patients with severe CKD [70].

Current status of CKD in Japan
Iseki et al. reported that the prevalence of CKD was higher
in Japan than in other Asian countries and the USA and that
individuals with a low GFR (<60 ml/min/1.73 m2 ) were estimated to be 20% of the adult population [71]. According to
the Japanese Society for Dialysis Therapy, the prevalence of
patients with ESRD was greater than 2000 per million population since 2005. CKD is also a major public health problem
in Japan and the Japanese Society of Nephrology published
a CKD Practice Guideline in September 2007 [72].
Most patients with CKD are diagnosed by decreased GFR,
which is usually estimated from serum creatinine level,
age, sex, and ethnicity by using the Modiﬁcation of Diet


in Renal Disease (MDRD) Study equation. Several studies
have revealed that the equation for estimated GFR must
be modiﬁed properly in non-white individuals, because of
the variation in serum creatinine caused by the difference
in muscle mass, the calibration difference in serum creatinine assay, or the different method to measure true GFR
[73]. Matsuo et al. reported the revised GFR-equation in
2009 to enable more accurate estimation of GFR in the
Japanese population (Table 7) [74]. Imai et al. re-evaluated
the prevalence of CKD patients using this new equation in
74,024 members of the adult population who participated
in a large-scale annual health check-up program in 2005.
They concluded that about 13% of Japanese adult population, approximately 13.3 million people, were predicted to
have CKD in 2005 [3].

Conclusions
CKD is frequently observed in HF patients and GFR had
an inverse graded association with HF severity. CKD is
one of the major predictors for admission for worsening
HF and cardiovascular/all-cause mortality in such patients.
Although a major focus of HF treatment has been on the
heart, treatment strategies also should be targeted on the
kidney. Evaluation of GFR should be performed in all patients
with HF and patients with CKD must be treated carefully
considering common pathophysiologic nature between two
organs. Given the increased incidence of both diseases which
pose signiﬁcant impact on public health, patients with CKD
should be appropriately included in future trials of HF to
develop clinical evidence, which will improve the prognosis
and quality of life in patients with HF.

Uremic cardiomyopathy is responsible for high morbidity and mortality rates among patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) or end-stage renal disease (ESRD); however, the early implementation of hemodialysis may halt its progression. Nonconventional hemodialysis, such as frequent hemodialysis, appears to have an advantage over conventional hemodialysis. Kidney transplantation has been shown to reverse uremic cardiomyopathy and to confer a significant survival advantage over hemodialysis. Targeting future therapies at the underlying cellular mechanisms of uremic cardiomyopathy may finally start to reduce the burden of uremic cardiomyopathy in the CKD and ESRD population.

Studies have shown that mortality from cardiovascular causes in patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) or end-stage renal disease (ESRD) is substantially higher than that predicted from analysis of traditional cardiovascular risk factors, suggesting that additional nontraditional risk factors must be involved.While the role of coronary artery disease (CAD) as a leading cause of mortality in patients with ESRD is well-known,4 5 some authors have suggested that more deaths among these patients were caused by left ven- tricular (LV) hypertrophy (LVH) and congestive heart failure than by CAD. This is further underscored by the suggestion that statin therapy is not as effective in this population of patients. This has led to more focus on the better understanding of the different and more important underlying pathophysiological entity, ie, uremic cardiomyopathy with its major component LVH, and its precipitating factors, aiming to find newer therapeutic targets.

DEFINITION OF UREMIC CARDIOMYOPATHY
There are few cardiovascular abnormalities that are commonly encountered in patients with CKD or ESRD; these include LVH, LV dilatation, and LV systolic and diastolic dysfunction. However, epidemiological studies and studies using magnetic resonance imaging suggest that the primary manifestation of uremic cardiomyopathy is LVH.Although different, overlapping, and confusing terms are used to describe this condition, uremic cardiomyopathy is thought to be the most succinct description of pathological cardiac hypertrophy, indicating the in?uence of impaired renal function on the myocardium.

EPIDEMIOLOGY OF UREMIC CARDIOMYOPATHY
In 2003, more than 320,000 people in the United States were receiving dialysis for ESRD, with a predicted increase to 2 million by 2030. Mortality from cardiovascular diseases (CVD) in patients with ESRD is 10 to 30 times higher than that in the general population. Cardiovascular complications lead in all causes of mortality among patients with CKD, accounting for approximately 50% of deaths.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF UREMIC CARDIOMYOPATHY
Uremic cardiomyopathy in patients with CKD or ESRD is the result of pressure overload, volume overload, and the uremic state itself. LV pressure overload occurs frequently from hypertension and arteriosclerosis, and occasionally from aortic stenosis; LV volume overload occurs as a result of the presence of an arteriovenous ?stula, anemia, and hypervolemia. LV pressure or volume overload leads to the development of LVH in an attempt to maintain the wall stress; therefore, LVH is initially a bene?cial adaptive response. Continuing LV overload leads to maladaptive cardiomyocytes changes and cardiomyocytes death, however, which may be further exacerbated by diminished perfusion, malnutrition, uremia, and hyperparathyroidism. This loss of cardiomyocytes predisposes to LV dilatation and ultimately systolic dysfunction. In addition, myocardial ?brosis occurs, which diminishes cardiac compliance leading to diastolic dysfunction. Therefore, while LVH is the initial manifestation and hallmark of this syndrome, in the more advanced stages, uremic cardiomyopathy can present with LV dilatation, along with systolic dysfunction and diminished LV ejection fraction (LVEF). Both animal and human studies proved that factors related to the uremic state itself provoke the development of LVH, regardless of pressure and volume overload. The correction of hypertension in rats with renal injury does not prevent the development of cardiac hypertrophy. When rats are subjected to renal injury by complete ligation of one kidney and infarct of two thirds of the remaining kidney, cardiac hypertrophy develops. In humans, LVH develops in high-risk populations with kidney disease, despite the effective control of hypertension. In diabetic patients with known diabetic nephropathy, a blood pressure independent LVH occurs.

MOLECULAR PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF UREMIC CARDIOMYOPATHY
Pressure and volume overloads are thought to stimulate LVH through integrins, which initiate intracellular signaling in response to a stretch of the extracellular matrix. The stretch may also promote the local release of ligands, such as angiotensin II and endothelin 1, which bind to cognate receptors on the surface of cardiomyocytes, stimulating intracellular signaling pathways. Independent of pressure and volume overloads, the LVH in CKD occurs because of the accumulation of hypertrophic substances associated with the uremic state; examples of these substances are endothelin 1, parathyroid hormone, tumor necrosis factor oi, leptin, interleukin 10c, and interleukin 6.22 Among these substances are cardiotonic steroids (CTSs) (also referred to as endogenous digitalis-like substances), which have been recently studied as a good therapeutic target because of their low molecular weight and potential to be ?ltered by a dialysis-semipermeable membrane. Two of these cardiotonic steroids are Ouabain and Marinobufagenin, which are endogenous CTSs that interact with the oi-subunit of the Na, K-ATPase transmembrane protein on the surface of cardiomyocytes. These substances are found in high concentrations in patients with CKD and are thought to be a key molecular component involved in the pathogenesis of uremic cardiomyopathy, through a mechanism that is not yet well defined. Another pathological mechanism implicated in the development of uremic cardiomyopathy is insulin resistance and the Akt pathway. This has recently been investigated as another potential therapeutic target for uremic cardiomyopathy. t is well known that insulin resistance is an independent risk factor for CVD in CKD.26 27 Underlying insulin resistance in patients with uremia leads to disruption in the balance of insulin's pleiotropic and metabolic actions re?ected by alterations in the intracellular signaling pathways of insulin. In particular, the protein kinase or Akt pathway (Figure 2). This pathway is believed to play a key role not only in regulating the development of LVH, but also in postnatal coronary angiogenesis, cardiac ?brosis, cellular apoptosis, calcium cycling, and metabolic dysfunction. Insulin resistance produces maladaptive alterations in the Akt pathway, enhancing its contribution to the development of uremic cardiomyopathy.

UREMIC CARDIOMYOPATHY TREATMENT
As previously illustrated, LVH is the main and early manifestation of uremic cardiomyopathy, it is by itself a powerful independent predictor of survival in CKD,31 32 and the regression of LVH is associated with reduced cardiovascular risk and improved survival. Conventional hemodialysis is the most common treatment for uremic cardiomyopathy, and it may be associated with reduction in LVH. Hemodialysis has also been described to reverse the systolic dysfunction and improve LVEF in some patients with ESRD. Angiotensin-converting-enzyme (ACE) inhibitors can be effective even in normotensive patients. Indeed, ramipril reduces LV mass in dialysis patients who were normotensive prior to therapy.36 The responsible mechanism of this bene?cial effect of ACE inhibitors, beyond lowering blood pressure, is not entirely clear; however, neuroendocrine mechanisms are thought to mbe implicated.

HEN TO START HEMODIALYSIS
The matter of when to start hemodialysis has been an issue of debate. While there are some reports that have indicated a relationship between higher start estimated glomerular ?ltration rate (start eGFR) and higher mortality,3943 several registries over the past decade report a historical trend towards starting dialysis at higher eGFRs, and at the same time a decline in mortality.
Theoretically, hemodialysis is like any other cardiomyopathy treatment, it might be more effective when applied before the start of the irreversible injury to the myocardium. Therefore, identifying patients who need to be started on hemodialysis without delay is important.

HOW GOOD IS CONVENTIONAL HEMODIALYSIS AS A TREATMENT FOR UREMIC CARDIOMYOPATHY
 It appears that while hemodialysis is the treatment of choice for uremic cardiomyopathy, it may not be an adequate treatment because the cardiac dysfunction or uremic cardiomyopathy tends to continue in spite of hemodialysis treatment. In one study of 98 patients with ESRD who had LVH on initiation of hemodialysis and had a follow up echocardiogram, 59% patients continued to have LVH on second echocardiogram, 21% had LV dilatation, 11% had normalized, and 8% developed systolic dysfunction. Conventional hemodialysis may not only be inadeuate to halt the progression of cardiac dysfunction, it can also be associated with dialysis-induced myocardial stunning.48 Dialysis induced myocardial stunning is explained by the fact that 20% to 30% of hemodialysis treatments are complicated by intradialytic hypotension. There are now an increasing number of studies using electrocardiographic, isotopic, and echocardio graphic techniques, which show that subclinical myocardial ischemia and injury may occur during dialysis. It is thought that, over time, the repetitive dialysis induced myocardial stunning or ischemia episodes may lead to permanent cardiac dysfunction with a significant increase in mortality in hemodialysis patients. A variety of therapeutic maneuvers aimed at improving the hemodynamic tolerability of treatment have been shown to reduce acute dialysis-induced myocardial ischemia, which may re?ect on cardiovascular morbidity and mortality of hemodialysis patients.Among these are lengthening the duration or increasing the frequency of hemodialysis to optimize ultrafiltration rate with minimal reductions in intravascular volume and cooling the dialysate.

NONCONVENTIONAL HEMODIALYSIS AS TREATMENT FOR UREMIC CARDIOMYOPATHY
In short daily hemodialysis (SDHD), patients receive 1.5 to 2.5 h of dialysis 5 or 6 days per week, in comparison to 3 days per week with conventional hemodialysis; SDHD is consistently associated with a decrease in antihypertensive use and LVH. Nocturnal home hemodialysis (NHD) is a treatment paradigm whereby patients self-administer their dialysis on 4 to 6 nights per week with each session lasting between 6 and 8 hours. This strategy combines both high-frequency treatments with long sessions. The cardiovascular bene?ts of NHD are well recognized, with one study showing a reduction in LV mass index (LVMI) of 22% in ESRD patients after converting to NHD; conversely, control patients remaining on conventional hemodialysis demonstrated a 6% progression of LVMI. Another study revealed a 28% to 41% improvement in LVEF when using NHD.The consistent reduction in blood pressure and antihypertensive medication use, as well as the regression of LVMI associated with NHD, was recently confirmed in a randomized controlled trial comparing cardiovascular characteristics between NHD and conventional hemodialysis. NHD has also been associated with an improvement in endothelial function. Therefore, NHD represents a promising novel approach to manage ESRD patients with LV dysfunction and uremic cardiomyopathy. Frequent hemodialysis is associated with less dialysis-induced hypotension and myocardial stunning com- pared with conventional hemodialysis. This may contribute to improved outcomes associated with frequent hemodialysis therapies.A recent study showed that, as compared with conventional hemodialysis, frequent hemodialysis was associated with favorable results with respect to the composite outcomes of death or change in LVMI and death or change in a physical-health composite score, even though this modality prompted more frequent interventions related to vascular access.

KIDNEY TRANSPLANT AS TREATMENT FOR UREMIC CARDIOMYOPATHY
 Renal transplantation has been shown to confer a significant survival advantage over maintenance hemodialysis. USRDS data indicate that the mortality rate for patients who received kidney transplant is remarkably better than that of patients with ESRD or those who are on conventional hemodialysis. This survival advantage conferred by successful renal transplantation is particularly striking in view of the fact that immunosuppressive medications have many potentially deleterious effects on standard cardiovascular risk factors.  The immunosuppressive regimens can cause or worsen hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and diabetes, contributing to CAD, which accounts for a sizable mortality rate in patients with ESRD who have undergone renal transplantation. However, it is apparent that the loss of renal function per se is the underlying pathology responsible for increased cardiovascular disease in patients with ESRD and that provision of a functioning kidney through renal transplantation overll halts the progression of CVD and dramatically reduces cardiovascular mortality.

 Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the leading cause of death among patients with end stage renal disease (ESRD). Patients with ESRD have cardiovascular (CV) mortality rates 10- to 20-fold higher than the general population. This increase in CV risk for patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) and FSRD is multifactorial. Important factors include dysreg- ulation of calcium-phosphorous metabolism and extraskeletal calci?cations, anemia, and heightened systemic in?ammation. This issue of Nepbrology Rounds reviews the risk factors connecting CVD and renal disease.

 Background

 CVD is the leading cause of death among patients with ESRD. In fact, an analysis of the United States Renal Data System (USRDS) revealed that mortality from CVD accounted for 42.2% of the 17.9 deaths/100 patient years at risk. In a prospective study of 4024 patients iIIitiating dialysis between 1996 and 1997, >50% had overt CVD at the time of initiation.2 Patients with ESRD have CV mortality rates 10- to 20-fold greater than the general population. This increased risk rises steeply to 265-fold in the 45 to 54 year old subgroup. Even patients with milder degrees of renal insufficiency have significant elevations in CV risk, ie, approximately 3-fold compared with the general population.  The Framingham Study was pivoml in determining risk factors for disease; it provided a set of measurable conditions or markers that, when evaluated, could predict the risk of disease, in parti- cular, a series of risk factors relevant to the development of CVD in the general population. The list included the traditional risk factors of age, sex, blood pressure (BP), dyslipidemia, diabetes, and smoking. However, the dramatic comparative increase in CV risk for patients with renal disease led to a search for additional,nontraditional CV risk factors in these patients (Figure 1).


 Anemia is usually observed in patients with glomerular filtration rates (GFRS) <60 mL/min/ 1.73m2. Anemia prevalence rates are approximately 25% in patients with creatinine clearance (CrCl) >50 mL/min,8 and approximately 44% in those with GFRS in the 15-29 mL/min/1.73m2 range (anemia defined as a hemoglobin (Hb) of <12 g/dL in men and <ll.0 g/dL in women). By stage 5 CKD, approximately 90% of patients are anemic. Several studies suggest that anemia is a major risk factor contributing to poor CVD outcomes, including left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH), worsening congestive heart failure (CHF), and myocardial ischemia.
 III a 1999 cross-sectional study, LVH prevalence was 26.7% (as detected by echocardiography). in patients with CrCl >50 mL/min, 30.8% in those with CrCl at 25-49 mL/min, and 45.2% in those with CrCl <25 mL/ min. l_n multivariate analyses by the same investigators, Hb concentration was found to be an independent risk factor for the development of LVH, with a 32% increased risk for LVH for every 0.5 g/dL decrease in Hb.1 Similarly, CrCl was also found to be associated with an increased risk of LVH development, with a 3% increase in risk of LVH for every 5 mL/min decline in GFR (P=0.0168). In fact, at initiation of dialysis, only 15% of patients possess normal LV structure and function, and they have 20- to 40-fold higher rates of CV mortality than the general population. These findings suggest that patients are anemic long before they develop ESRD. A study based on data from Medical Evidence Forms (Health Care Financing Administration 272 8, now the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services CMS), found that erythropoietin treatment given prior to dialysis initiation was associated with survival improvement as compared with nontreated patients. A study of 11 patients with CKD15 demonstrated that partial improvement of anemia was associated with a significant decrease in LV mass index (LVMI), from 178.2 1 20.6 g/m2 to 147.3 1 20.6 g/m2, and a trend towards decreased LV thickness. Another study found reductions in LVMl with partial correction of anemia (hematocrit [Hct] 32.1% 1 1.8%) at 4 months (from baseline of 140.6 1 12.1 g/m2 to 126.9 1 10.0 g/m2 after partial correction), and a further decrease in LVMl with normalization of Hct at 12 months (Hct 39.1% 1 2.4%), to 111.2 1 8.3 g/m2. A retrospective analysis of 89 193 Medicare patients with ESRD18 found that predialysis erythropoietin treatment was associated with higher Hct at dialysis initiation and a lower risk of mortality at 1 year.
 Additional risk factors for cardiovascular disease in patients with renal disease: Disordered mineral metabolism , Endothelial dysfunction , Increased cardiovascular risk , Heightened inflammatory , Dyslipidemia and Hyperhomocysteinemia.

 Several studies, however, have also suggested that normalizing Hct results in unfavorable outcomes. In the U.S. Normal Hematocrit Study, 1233 hemodialysis (HD) patients with either ischemic heart disease or CHF were assigned randomly to Hct targets of 30% or 42%. The trial was preemptively terminated due to a trend towards a higher risk in the primary endpoint, death or first nonfatal myocardial infarction (MI) in the normal Hct group (relative risk [RR] 1.3; 95% CI, 0.9-1.9). The open-label Correction of Hemoglobin and Outcomes in Renal Insufficiency (CHOIR) study randomized 1432 CKD patients to either an Hb of 13.5 g/dL or 11.3 g/dL, with a primary endpoint composite of death, MI, CHF hospitalization, and stroke. In the resulting 222 composite events, 125 were in the higher Hb group and 97 were in the lower Hb group (P=0.03; hazard ratio [HR] of 1.34; 95% CI, 1.03-1.74). There was also a significantly higher rate of serious adverse events in the higher Hb group.
  Disordered mineml membolism.In the past decade, calcium-phosphorous management in CKD has shifted to concerns about significant increases in CV risk associated with extraskeleml calci?cation, particularly in the coronary vasculature. A study in ESRD patients" assessed valvular calcifications by electron beam computed tomography (CT), and found aortic and mitral calcification rates of 55% and 59%, respectively. Later, They found that a serum product of calcium and phosphorous (CaP) >55 was associated with a significant increase in mortality. Those individuals in the highest quintile of CaP (>72) had an increased risk of death (RR =1.34) compared with those with a CaP in the 42 to 52 range. A study evaluating the presence of coronary calcification in 39 young patients on dialysis and 60 normal subjects, found that 14 of the patients on dialysis had coronary calcification compared with only 3 normal subjects. Furthermore, patients with calci?cation were found to be older (26 1 3 vs 15 1 5 years, P<0.001) and had been on dialysis for a longer duration (14 1 5 vs 4 1 4 years, P<0.001). In addition, elevated CaP and the use of calcium-based phos- phate binders were both found to be associated with increased risks of calcification. In a follow-up CT scan of a subgroup(n=10) of the patients with calcification, the calcification score increased nearly 2-fold (125 1 104 to 246 1 216, P=0.02), over a mean interval of 20 1 3 months. A large observational study of 40 538 patients on HD found that serum phosphorous >5 .0, higher adjusted serum calcium concentrations, and moderate-to-severe hyperparathyroidism (parathyroid hormone [PTH] 2 600 pg/mL) were associated with an increased RR of death. The population-attributable risk percentage for disordered mineral metabolism taken collectively was 17.5% (largely due to the high prevalence of hyperphosphatemia).

  Dyslipidemia.The Framingham Study essentially established the key role of dyslipidemia in the development of CVD; however, lipid profiles in patients with kidney disease, particularly with ESRD, are different from those in individuals without kidney disease. Total and low density lipoprotein cholesterol levels are often within the normal range, while high- density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL C) levels are decreased and plasma triglycerides are increased." In addition, patients with renal disease also have greater oxidative stress, resulting in higher levels of oxidized glutathione and advanced glyca- tion end products, as well as increased oxidation oflipopro- teins. In fact, the oxidative change in LDL may be the initial and requisite step in the development of atherosclerosis. It results from the ingestion of oxidized LDL by scavenger monocytes, the subsequent enrichment of these cells with cholesterol esters, and the consequent formation of foam cells, the primary step in atherosclerosis. '33 Oxidized LDL may play a role in atherogenesis through other pathways as well, including an increase in leukocyte-endothelial interactions and monocyte chemotaxis, as well as endothelial cell toxicity and the stimulation of platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF). Chronic HD patients have increased titers of auto- antibodies to oxidized LDL relative to age-matched con- trols;3 thus, LDL C, the lipid parameter most often followed in the general population, may not be an optimal marker in patients with renal disease.

  Given the increased atherogenesis in patients with renal disease, even in the presence of normal levels of LDL C, several investigators evaluated the use of non HDL C, calculated by subtracting HDL-C from total cholesterol, as a potential marker for CV risk in patients with ESRD. They assessed triglyceride, intermediate density lipoprotein (IDL)-C, HDL-C, and non HDL C levels in 50 patients with ESRD and 20 healthy controls. They found that the patients with ESRD had higher triglyceride levels, IDL C, and very low density lipoprotein (VLDL)-C than control subjects, but lower levels of HDL-C; however, there were no statistically signi?cant differences in non HDL C between the groups. In receiver operator curve (ROC) analyses to evaluate which of the lipid parameters was the most useful biomarker for CVD risk, they observed that IDL C and VLDL C had the best ROC curves, while non HDL C had a curve close to the 45 line a.I1d, thus, was a poor marker for CVD risk. They assessed lipid variables as they relate to CV outcome data using multivariate Cox models and, in contrast to the findings of Schreier et al, found that non HDL C was an independent predictor of CV mortality in 525 patients on maintenance HD. As a result, although lipid abnormalities remain a key risk factor in the development of CV disease, a new set of standards must be established for patients with renal disease compared with disease free individuals.

 Hyperhomoeysteinemia. Homocysteine (Hcy) is a sulfur-containing amino acid that is produced as a result of the tra.I1smet.hylat.ion of methionine. Initial evidence suggested that elevations in plasma Hcy levels were associated with increased risks of ischemic heart disease or stroke. This evidence was based on retrospective case-control studies indicating higher Hcy levels in subjects with these disorders than in their age-matched controls. In 1995, an initial meta-analysis of observational studies on Hcy levels and CV disease reported that a 5 umol/L elevation in plasma Hcy resulted in a 70% increased risk of ischemic heart disease and an 80% elevation in stroke risk. Since then, numerous prospective studies have examined the association between Hcy and CVD. A 5-year prospective study of 14 916 physicians revealed a 3.4-fold increased risk for MI in men with elevated Hcy levels. The Homocysteine Studies Collaboration Group subsequently performed a meta-analysis of a number of prospective studies to evaluate the role of Hcy in populations that were apparently healthy at the time of enrollment. A 25% decrease in plasma Hcy levels (3 pmol/L) was associated with an 11% (95% CI, 4% to 17%) reduction in risk of ischemic heart disease and a 19% (95% CI, 5% to 31%) reduction in stroke risk after adjustments for age, sex, systolic BP, total cholesterol, and the study in question. Elevations in plasma Hcy levels are a common metabolic consequence of renal failure and elevations of Hcy levels 2- to 3-fold are found in patients with renal dysfunctionfm l_n fact, systemic Hcy concentrations increase with incremental decreases in GFR and this is observed not only among patients with established renal dysfunction, '45 but also in those with normal'48 and supranormal GFRs as well. The Oxford Healthy Aging Project studied 1200 subjects 265 years old and found that, after adjusting for age, sex, and serum folate and vimmin B12 levels, a 1% difference in serum Cr was associated with a 1% difference in Hcy level. Prospective studies of patients with renal dysfunction suggest that such increases place these patients at an increased risk of CV events. A 10 iimol/L increase in plasma Hcy concentrations  a level commonly seen in renal dysfunction  has been associated with a 1.8-fold increased risk of CV events. The mechanism linking hyperhomocysteinemia to CV disease remains some- what obscure; however, it appears to include direct endothelial injury, an increase in the oxidation of LDL, an increase in thromboxane mediated platelet aggregation, a decrease in thrombomodulin expression and protein C activation, and an increase in smooth muscle cell (SMC) proliferation.


  The association between inflammation, as measured by hsCRP, and atherosclerosis has been demonstrated through numerous prospective clinical trials. As a prognostic marker, hsCRP has proven useful in the setting of acute coronary syndromes, both for short-term, inpatient prognostica- tion and for long-term outcome prediction, and as a primary prevention screening tool for CV risk assessment. The CV effects are implicated by CRP mechanisms such as complement activation; induction of adhesion molecule expression (including vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 and selectin); an increase in the endothelial cell expression of plasminogen activator in.hibitor-1; augmentation of T-cell- mediated damage to endothelial cells; stimulation of macrophages; reduction in nitric oxide (NO) genera- tion; and inhibition of angiogenesis. Elevations of CRP are reported in >70% of patients receiving HD. They demonstrated an increased prevalence of coronary valve calcifications in ESRD patients with elevated CRP levels compared to those with decreased levels. The association between in?ammation and calci?cation may be an inflammatory cell-mediated promotion of alkaline phosphatase activity in osteoclast-like cells found in the vascular beds that was demonstrated in 1/itro.
 In conjunction with elevated cardiac troponin T (TnT) levels, hsCRP has an additive prognostic value. A prospec- tive multicenter trial of 224 hemodialysis patients. They assessed the predictive value of TnT and hsCRP levels for the long-term risk of all-cause mortality. They found that progressively higher levels of both bio- markers were associated with increased mortality compared with the lowest quartiles. After choosing arbitrary cutoff points for high and low levels of both biomarkers, they divided patients into 4 groups based upon whether they had low levels of both biomarkers, high levels of both, or 1 of the 2 was high, but the other was low. Over the study period, a 2.5 fold (95% CI, 1.5-4.0) increase in mortality was found in patients with high levels of both biomarkers compared with patients having low levels of both. In patients with elevations in only 1 of the 2 biomarkers, the increase in mortality risk was between the low-low and high-high groups. Furthermore, in patients with low levels of hsCRP, low and high levels of TnT did not result in a significant increase in mortality (63% vs 42% respectively; P=0.22), while among patients with high levels of hsCRP, high levels of TnT were associated with significantly higher mortality than those with low TnT (33% vs 65% respectively; P=0.03). In stratifying these findings by positive or negative family history and by white race, no interaction was indicated between these factors and the levels of the 2 biomarkers. Multivariable modeling revealed that both hsCRP and TnT were independent predictors of all-cause mortality along with age, white race, presence of diabetes, and body surface area, with no interactions detected between any of these variables and the levels of either biomarker.

 They investigated hsCRP concentrations in 399 patients with ESRD on HD and found an increase in mortality in those with hsCRP levels 21 mg/L. Mormlity at 2 years was 18% for the group with normal hsCRP, in contrast to 44% in those with hsCRP 21 mg/L (P<0.001). Their results revealed that hsCRP was an independent predictor of survival and the best biomarker for predicting all-cause mortality in comparison with cardiac tropinin I (Tnl) and TnT levels.

 They evaluated CRP levels in 94 patients with ESRD on HD receiving folic acid and vitamin B complex supplements. CRP was a significant predictor of mortality (P=0.03) and patients with CRP <3 mg/ L had greater survival than those with higher CRP (P=0.01). Even after adjustment for age and anti-oxLDL antibody titre in a multivariate analysis, CRP continued to be a significant risk factor for mortality (odds ratio [OR] 3.1; 95% CI, 1.04-9.25; P=0.04).

  Endothelidl dysfunction: The role of nitric oxide . NO is an inhibitor of vascular smooth-muscle cell proliferation, platelet aggregation, and monocyte endothelial adhe- sion, all of which are critically involved in the development of atherosclerosis. NO is also a potent vasodilator and therefore a key regulator of blood flow.82 83 NO is synthesized by oxidation of the terminal nitrogen of the amino acid L-arginine by nitric oxide synthase (NOS). Asymmetric dimethyl L-arginine (ADMA), an analog of L-arginine, blocks the active site of NOS and suppresses the synthesis of NO. Plasma concentrations of ADMA increase early in the course of renal disease, even in the presence of a normal GFR. A 2.7 iimol/L increase in plasma levels (ie, the average difference in concentration between patients with CKD and normal subjects), is associated with a >3-fold increase in risk for CV events. In vitro evidence from endot.helial cell cultures suggests that physiologic concentrations of ADMA (2-10 iimol/L) result in inhibition of NOS, with subsequent reductions in NO production. In addition, administration of ADMA to experimental animals results in systemic vascular resistance and increased BP. Cultured endothelial cells treated with blood from patients with renal disease (with ADMA concentrations 4-fold higher than healthy controls) resulted in significant ex vivo inhibition of NO synthesis, giving further evidence to the physiologic relevance of this pathway. A cross-sectional study in patients without renal disease suggested that higher levels of ADMA were associated with increasing age, higher mean arterial pressures, and also with increasing thickness of the intima-media of the carotid arteries. Several clinical studies have demonstrated increased levels of ADMA in patients with renal dysfunction. Given that this increase is seen even in patients with renal disease and a normal GFR (measured by inulin clearance), the mechanism is thought to be secondary to a disturbance of ADMA degradation by renal dimet.hylarginine dimet.hylaminohydrolase rather than decreased renal excretion.Furthermore, in one study with ESRD patients, those with evidence of atherosclerotic disease had significantly elevated ADMA levels compared with the nonathero- sclerotic group, suggesting that the ADMA levels were related to the presence of atherosclerosis. New evidence suggests that increasing ADMA levels, and thus decreasing levels of NO, may play a role in the progression of renal disease. With these findings, studies now are focused on therapies to restore endothelial cell function in patients with renal disease. Some research suggests that L-arginine, but not D-arginine, results in restoration of function in patients with ESRD.% In patients with peripheral vascular disease, L-arginine administration resulted in increased endogenous NO synthesis and ameliorated symptoms of intermittent claudication compared with healthy control patients.


 Lipoprotein a (Lp[a]; a similar lipoprotein to LDL, but with the addition of a glycosylated protein, apolipoprotein) has been linked with the development of athero- sclerosis and elevated levels are found in the ESRD population. Studies indicate that there are up to 6-fold higher levels in patients with severe nephrotic syndrome and up to 4-fold higher concentrations in dialysis patients, compared with healthy controls. In addition, They found a significant association between elevated levels and mortality from CVD in HD patients. Lp(a) levels have been shown to decrease by 45%-75% in patients who have undergone renal trans- plantation, further supporting an association with renal disease. The 2 postulated mechanisms for this increase in Lp(a) are: hepatic overproduction of albumin and other proteins produced by the liver (eg, apolipopro- teins), secondary to reduced oncotic pressure stimulation resulting from hypoalbuminemia; or, alternatively, a reduction in catabolism if, in fact, the kidney plays a role in this process.
  Other mechanisms possibly play a role in the development of atherosclerotic plaque mediated by Lp(a). Lp(a) is ingested by macrophages, resulting in the formation of foam cells, and it can be oxidized, which increases its atherogenicity. Lp(a) also impairs the activation of plasminogen, resulting in enhanced vascular SMC proliferation.
  Numerous studies have evaluated the role of Lp(a) in CV risk stratification.They demonstrated the link between Lp(a), Hcy, fibrinogen, and CVD in patients with renal disease. In vitro experiments by They suggested 1 mechanism for this link between these biomarkers, indicating that, in physiologic concentrations, Hcy in its reduced form changed the structure of Lp(a) to expose lysine-binding sites located on the apolipoprotein (a) segment, thus causing an increase in Lp(a) binding to fibrinogen.

 Conclusions
  CVD is the major cause of mortality in patients with renal disease. Numerous current investigations focus on risk stratification to identify and treat individuals at a high risk for disease. In renal disease, the search for risk factors and biomarkers of disease must assess the impor- tant confounders introduced by renal failure, ie, the effect of reductions in renal clearance. Elevations in substances usually cleared by the kidney may suggest CVD, but may also simply be a re?ection of decreased renal clearance.  The link between in?ammation and CVD has been demonstrated in numerous studies, and several substances (eg, TnT, CRP, and fibrinogen) reflect the degree of inflammation. Several new risk factors are under investigation to determine their exact roles and, although the understanding of cardiac risk stratification in patients with renal disease has improved, there is a great deal still to be investigated.
